Aeronautics
AN F311 Principles of Aerodynamics 3 0 3
Introduction to Airfoils, forces and coefficients, fundamental
principles, inviscid incompressible flow, incompressible flow
over Airfoils and Finite Wings, Compressible Flow, Subsonic
Compressible Flow, Transonic and Supersonic Flow, Hyperson-
ic Flow, Viscous Flow, Exposure to Software tools for Geometry
Modelling and Flow field simulation.
Pre-requisite: CE F231 OR CHE F212 OR ME F212 Fluid Me-
chanics OR MF 218 Transport Phenomena in Manufacturing
AN F312 Aircraft Propulsion 3 0 3
Air breathing engines, Jet engines, Performance parameters of
jet engines, Ramjet and pulsejet engines, Thermodynamic and
performance analysis of turbojet, turbofan and turboprop en-
gines, Intake, Combustion and Exhaust systems in propulsion
engines, Advanced propulsion engines. Exposure to Software
Tools for Nozzle Flow and Propulsion Performance Simulations
Pre-requisite: CE F231 OR CHE F212 OR ME F212 Fluid Me-
chanics OR MF 218 Transport Phenomena in Manufacturing
AN F313 Flight Mechanics and Controls 3 0 3
Introduction to Airplane Flight Mechanics, Equation of Motion
(3DOF), Atmosphere and Propulsion, Aerodynamics forces,
Cruise and Climb, Take-Off and Landing, Acceleration and
Turns, Equation of Motion (6DOF), Static Stability and Control,
Dynamic Stability and Control, Feedback Stability Augmenta-
tion, Exposure to Software Tools for Flight Path Simulation and
Control.
AN F314 Introduction to Flight 3 0 3
Fundamentals and historical developments in Aviation, Stand-
ard Atmosphere Properties, Basic Aerodynamics, Airfoils and
Wings, Forces, Supersonic Flight, Airplane Performance, Stabil-
ity and Control, Types of powerplants for aerospace vehicles,
Introduction to Structures and Materials, Supersonic and Hyper-
sonic Vehicles, Exposure to Software tools for Wing Geometry
Modelling and Force Calculations.
AN F315 Aircraft Structures 3 0 3
Basic elasticity and 2D problems, Virtual work and energy
method, Bending of thin plates, Structural components of air-
craft, Airworthiness and airframe loads, Bending, Shear and
Torsion of Thin-Walled Beams, Stress analysis of aircraft com-
ponents including Wing spars and box beams, Fuselage,
Wings, Fuselage frame and wing ribs, Laminated composite
structures, Aeroelasticity, Computational Modelling of various
Aircraft Components under Service Loads.
Pre-requisite: ME F211 OR CE F211 Mechanics of Solids
Biological Sciences
BIO F110 Biology laboratory 0 2 1
An introductory level course where students would perform se-
lected experiments of biology in the laboratory so that they ap-
preciate the concepts learnt in theory course. Experiments re-
lated to Microscopy and micrometry, quantification of biological
macromolecules, chlorophyll estimation, measurement of sol-
vent potential of plant tissue, measurement of parameters relat-
ed to cell cycle, Experiments related to hematology, DNA quan-
tification from the plant organs; Water analysis.
BIO F111 General Biology 3 0 3
Living systems and their properties; major biological com-
pounds; basic physiological processes; introduction to genetics;
environment and evolution.
V
BIO F201 Introductory Biology 3 1 4
Living systems and their properties; classification of organisms;
biochemical pathways operative in organisms; introductory ge-
netics, Introductory recombinant DNA technology, ecology and
environmental scienes and related basic labs.
BIO F211 Biological Chemistry 3 0 3
The molecular process of life presents us with a seemingly nev-
er ending succession of chemical mechanisms of almost incred-
ible fascination. This course is introduced at the cellular and
molecular level and focus upon bio -macromolecules, biosyn-
thesis of macromolecules, energy yielding and requiring pro-
cesses, genetic information etc. This would help going for high-
er level activities, appreciation of biochemical problems, evalua-
tion and problem solving. It also includes theory of techniques
used in biochemistry and related experiments.
BIO F212 Microbiology 3 1 4
Introduction and classification of microbes; structure, physiology
and genetics of microbial cell; isolation, cultivation, physiological
and biochemical characterization of microbes; host parasite re-
lationship; microbiology of soil, water and food; physical chemi-
cal methods of controlling microbes; antimicrobial drugs; clinical
microbiology; and related lab components.
BIO F213 Cell Biology 3 0 3
Types and properties of cells; microscopy; membrane structure,
function and transport; endomembrane system and its func-
tions; nuclear organization and functions; ribosomes and protein
synthesis; cytoskeleton; cell communication; cell cycle, cell
growth and cancer; apoptosis; techniques, related experiments
and applications of cell biology.
BIO F214 Integrated Biology 3 0 3
The Integrative Biology course is a course which bridges as well
as opens new vistas to a student taking up bioogy. The course
covers two tracks, essentially. The first track introduces the stu-
dent to the ordering that helps biologists to actually study the
vast diversity of the living world. This track would encompass
questions related to the origin and evolutionary pathways fol-
lowed in Nature, as well as the methods followed by biologists
to systematically categorize and document them. The second
track highlights the uses and applications of biology in everyday
life – whether in the economic or in the social realms. Together,
the course projects the subject in a way from which the student
can choose and implement his biological knowledge vis-à-vis
his/her interests.
BIO F215 Biophysics 3 0 3
A study of molecules and their interaction forces; bio-energetics
and physical techniques as applied to biological phenomena
and related labs.
BIO F216 Water,Sanitation and Solid Waste Man- 3 0 3
agement
Municipal Solid Waste Management in Developing Countries,
Planning and Design of Sanitation Systems and Technologies,
Introduction to Household Water Treatment and Safe Storage,
Introduction to Faecal sludge management.
BIO F217 Laboratory for Water,Sanitation and Solid 1 2 3
waste Management
Chemical oxygen and Biological oxygen demand of wastewater,
Total organic carbon analysis, Phosphorus analysis, Kjeldahl
Nitrogen analysis – for waste water, estimation of total solids
and volatile solids in organic waste, biochemical methane po-
tential of organic waste, struvite precipitation from wastewater
and analysis by XRD Microbial fuel cell for wastewater treat-
ment, detection of methanogens by fluorescence microscopy,
atomic absorption spectrophotometric analysis of arsenic in wa-
ter composting of faecal sludge.
BIO F231 Biology Project Laboratory 3
The course includes projects involving laboratory investigation
VI-2
or laboratory development in Biology. The course is normally
available to students of second or higher level. The course must
coterminate with a project report.
BIO F241 Ecology and Environmental Sciences 3 0 3
Biotic and abiotic components of environment; limiting factors;
regional ecology; ecosystem productivity and trophism; popula-
tion and community ecology; succession and evolution; pollu-
tion; environmental biotechnology; Indian environmental move-
ment. Associated with related labs.
BIO F242 Introduction to Bioinformatics 3 0 3
Introduction to genomic & Proteomics, Biological databases
and data mining, sequence similarity search and sequence
alignment algorithms, Phylogenetic tree construction algorithms,
Protein structure predication and structure analysis, use of soft-
ware package in Bioinformatics; Related lab components.
BIO F243 Genetics 3 0 3
Facts and theories of heredity, their relation to the present state
of biological theory in general; elements of population genetics;
genetics and species concept and related labs.
BIO F244 Instrumental Methods of Analysis 1 3 4
Principles, configuration, applications of instruments like mass
spectrophotometer, NMR,UV, IR, X-ray apparatus, atomic spec-
trophotometer, Fluorescence Spectroscopy, gas chromatog-
raphy, liquid scintillation spectrophotometer, laser device, high
voltage electrophoresis, ultracentrifuge, DTA,TGA, Thermo Cy-
cler-PCR, SDS-PAGE, ELISA etc. The course is specially de-
signed for students in the first degree majoring in experimental
sciences and would require groups of students to work with the
above instruments in order to appreciate the potentiality of such
modern instrumental methods of analysis.
BIO F266 Study Project 3
These courses include projects which are oriented towards
readings from published literature or books about new frontiers
of development or analysis of available database. These cours-
es are normally available to students in second or higher levels.
These courses must coterminate with project reports.
BIO F311 Recombinant DNA Technology 3 0 3
The course deals with theoretical aspects and lab exposure to
selected experiments of recombinant DNA manipulation. Em-
phasis will be placed on procedures to create chimeric mole-
cules using examples from actual experimental work. Vector
designing, PCR, qPCR, DNA sequencing, in-vitro mutagenesis,
cloning in prokaryotic and eukaryotic systems and whole ge-
nome approaches will be covered with related lab components.
BIO F312 Plant Physiology 3 0 3
Basic functional processes in plants; Plant tissue system, Plant-
water relations, Gaseous exchange, Stomatal regulations, Min-
eral nutrition and absorption, Transport of material, Growth and
development, Hormones and PGRs, Photoperiodism, Vernaliza-
tion, Plant defense mechanisms, Stress Physiology and related
lab components.
BIO F313 Animal Physiology 3 0 3
Principles and concepts underlying the function of tissues and
organ systems in animals, with emphasis on mammalian sys-
tems and integration of systems at the level of the whole organ-
ism. Several biological systems are considered, including res-
piratory, circulatory, nervous, endocrine, immune, excretory,
muscles, skeletal and reproductive systems. Laboratory session
will help to study function of any organ system; Related lab
components.
BIO F314 Conservation Biology 2 1 3
Biological diversity: its measurement, value and crisis; conser-
vation at ecosystem, population and species levels; protection,
management and res-toration of ecosystems; sustainable de-
velopment and community-based conservation; conservation
legislation. Course practicum will be effected through classroom
V
and field activities.
BIO F315 Applied Nutrition and Nutraceuticals 3 0 3
This course will provide a broad framework for understanding
the significance of food and nutrition to human health and well-
being. Beginning with basic concepts in nutritional biochemistry
& microbiology, this course will expand into applied nutrition
themes ― malnutrition – under-nutrition versus over-nutrition,
nutrigenomics, clinical nutrition, functional foods & nutraceuti-
cals, food safety and security. The course will also include
themes such as industrial development of functional and geno-
type-specific foods and beverages (example, infant-food formu-
lations), fortified foods, phytochemicals, nutritional databases &
personalized nutritional plan, using suitable case-studies
BIO F341 Developmental Biology 3 0 3
Scope and problems in developmental biology; major model or-
ganisms (vertebrates, invertebrates and plants) and their life cy-
cles; patterning and axis formation; morphogenesis; organo-
genesis; nervous system; germ cells and sex; cell differentiation
and stem cells; growth, ageing and regeneration; applications of
developmental biology. The course will emphasize universal
principles that govern the process of development; Related lab
components.
BIO F342 Immunology 3 0 3
Introduction to immune system, cell mediated and humoral im-
munity, immune system in health and disease immunity to infec-
tious diseases, immune mechanisms involved in cancer, immu-
nodeficiency and autoimmunity. Vaccination and transplantation
Immunology; Related lab components.
BIO F352 Cell and Tissue Culture Technology 3 1 4
Theories and practices on in vitro techniques for plants and an-
imals, development of normal and tumor cell lines, somatic hy-
bridization, monoclonal antibody production, hairy root cultures,
secondary metabolite production, scale-up strategies for large
scale production of biomass.
BIO F366 Lab Project 3
BIO F367 Lab Project 3
These courses include projects involving laboratory investiga-
tion or laboratory development in the students discipline or in-
terdisciplinary areas. These courses are normally available to
students in third or higher levels. These courses must cotermi-
nate with project reports.
BIO F376 Design Project 3
BIO F377 Design Project 3
These courses are intended to impart training in design of prod-
uct/ process or other artifact to the students in the discipline or
interdisciplinary areas. These courses are normally available to
students in third or higher levels. These courses must cotermi-
nate with project reports.
BIO F411 Laboratory 0 9 3
Specially designed for M.Sc. Biological Sciences; cannot be
taken by others under any circumstances.
This laboratory course is designed only for M.Sc. Biological Sci-
ences students and aims to expose the students to and build
competence in selected techniques of modern biology.
BIO F413 Molecular Biology of Cell 3 0 3
Introduction of eukaryotic cell cycle, genetic regulation of cell
cycle and differential gene expression during developmental
process. In addition, the postulated functions of hitherto accept-
ed non-essential DNA and the functioning of higher eukaryotic
genes with unexpected structures in eukaryotic genomes would
also be covered.
BIO F417 Biomolecular Modelling 3 0 3
Biomolecular Conformation, Structural genomics and prote-
omics, protein folding, Forecefield, Simulation, Conformational
analysis, ab initio structure prediction, comparative modeling,
VI-3
lattice models, usage of modeling packages.
BIO F418 Genetic Engineering Techniques 1 3 4
Experiments on the common molecular biology techniques used
in gene manipulation in bacteria and plants; gene cloning pro-
cedure in bacteria – from isolation of plasmids to screening of
recombinant clones; polymerase chain reaction (PCR) and its
applications; gene and protein expression analysis; DNA se-
quencing; Agrobacterium-mediated gene transfer in plants and
introduction to plant cell culture techniques; Use of software for
molecular biology.
BIO F419 Molecular Evolution 3 0 3
Introduction of evolution of macromolecules, reconstruction of
evolutionary history of genes and organisms, evolutionary adap-
tation to temperature, water solute adaptation, dynamics of
genes in populations, rates and pattern of nucleotide substitu-
tion, evolution of gene duplication and domain shuffling, con-
creted evolution of multigene family, genome organization and
evolution, roles of mutation and selection in molecular evolution.
BIO F421 Enzymology 3 0 3
Enzyme nomenclature and classification; isolation and purifica-
tion; structures; kinetics; regulation of enzymatic reactions;
evaluation of enzymes and other proteins.
BIO F431 Reproductive Physiology 3 0 3
Study of sexual cycles; biochemistry of fertilisation; control of
ovarian functions; gonadotropins; pheromones and mammalian
reproduction.
BIO F441 Biochemical Engineering 3 0 3
Principles of Chemical Engineering applied to Bioprocesses; Ki-
netic Models for growth, substrate utilization and product for-
mation; Biological reaction kinetics and applied enzyme cataly-
sis; immobilized biocatalysts; Bioreactor Design and Operation;
Fermentation, Upstream & Downstream processing; Novel Bio-
reactor Configurations; Transport phenomena in Bioprocesses;
Instrumentation and control; Bioprocess Optimization and Scale
up; Industrial Protein Purification Techniques; Commercial En-
zymes & Biopharmaceuticals; Bioprocess Patenting, Economics
& Feasibility Studies.
BIO F451 Bioprocess Technology 3 0 3
Bioprocess Principles; Kinetics of Biomass production, sub-
strate utilization and product formation; Kinetics of enzyme cata-
lyzed reactions and applied enzyme catalysis; Fermentation
process parameters and controls, Upstream & Downstream
processing; Bioreactor Design & Operation; Transport process-
es in Bioreactors; Novel Bioreactor Configurations; Immobilized
biocatalysts; Bioconversion; Protein Purification; Industrial ap-
plications of Bioprocesses; Bioprocess Patenting & Economics.
BIO F491 Special Project 3
This is an unstructured open-ended course where under the
overall supervision of an instructor-in-charge, batches of stu-
dents will be attached to different instructors. Each batch will
work on a specific time-bound project which is of basic or pe-
ripheral concern of his discipline. Each student must submit a
project report as a culmination of his endeavour and investiga-
tion. The instructor- in-charge will determine the choice of the
project and also whether or not the project report is to be sub-
mitted jointly by a group or individually by a student. The course
will aim to evaluate student's actual ability to use the fundamen-
tals of knowledge and to meet new unknown situations as
demonstrated by the students' interaction with the instructors
and instructor-in- charge and aggregated in the project report.
The instructor-in- charge may assign specific hours for formal
brain-storming sessions.
BIO G510 Application of Computers and Statistics in 5
Biology
to data classification, analysis and probability; statistical infer-
ence – estimation and hypothesis testing; linear regression and
correlation; design of experiments; analysis of variance; non
parametric procedures & tests; statistical quality control; exper-
V
imental design in clinical trials and validation; basic techniques
in optimization. Introduction to computer and its components;
operating systems; principles and use of standard software
packages having application in drug design, development, anal-
ysis, etc.; principles of software creation; processing concepts,
flow charting and algorithms, programming constructs, pro-
gramming languages, program development sequence; infor-
mation systems: need, significance concepts, their analysis, de-
sign and implementation; software life cycle with special refer-
ence to software planning and maintenance.
BIO G511 Population and Quantitative Genetics 5
Gene pool, allele frequency, genotype frequency, Hardy-
Weinberg equilibrium & its complications, non-random breeding,
genetic drift, genetic load, gene flow, selection, intensity of se-
lection pressure, inbreeding & artificial selection, natural selec-
tion & polymorphism, neutral theory & evolution speciation.
BIO G512 Molecular Mechanism of Gene Expression 3 2 5
Prokaryotic and eukaryotic genomes and their topology: DNA -
protein interactions; RNA transcription and transcriptional con-
trol; DNA replication; transcription in yeast; RNA processing;
translation; mechanism of gene expression in pro and eukary-
otes.
BIO G513 Microbial and Fermentation Technology 3 2 5
Metabolic Stoichiometry- energetics, fundamentals of microbes
and their morphology, Stoichiometry of cell growth and product
formation, fermentation kinetics, phases of growth in batch cul-
ture, continuous culture and fed-batch cultures, kinetics of cell
growth, product formation and substrate utilization-substrate
and product inhibition kinetics, enzyme technology. Industrial
Biotechnology- strain selection and improvement, media formu-
lation and sterilization strategies, industrial applications, fermen-
tation and product recovery, preparation of alcohols, antibiotics,
organic acids, enzymes, bakery and dairy products, biopharma-
ceuticals, vaccine production.
BIO G514 Molecular Immunology 3 2 5
This course will deal extensively with topics like molecular basis
of T and B cell antigen recognition and activation. Immunity to
microbes and diseases caused by humoral and cell mediated
immune responses will be covered and emphasis placed on
congenital and acquired immunodeficiencies. Advanced topics
like antibody engineering will be discussed with the help of re-
view articles.
BIO G515 Stem Cell and Regenerative Biology 3 1 4
Introduction to stem cells and regenerative biology; embryonic
stem cells, adult stem cells, manipulation of stem cells for re-
placing cells in diseased tissues; transplantation of embryonic
and adult stem cells, replacing congenitally defective organs
and damaged organs, tissue engineering, biodegradable and
biocompatible materials, nano-devices, and regulatory perspec-
tives.
BIO G516 Fermentation Processes (5*)
Introduction to Fermentation, fermentation processes, microbial
organisms in fermentation, strain isolation, improvement and
preservation, media formulation, sterilization, metabolic path-
ways and engineering, metabolite overproduction, detailed case
studies on food fermentation including cheese, dairy products,
bakery foods, wine, brandy, beer, and food related fermentation
including single cell protein, baker's yeast, enzymes, organic ac-
ids, antibiotics, amino acids, bio-fuel, industrial alcohol. Prepa-
ration of vaccine, insecticides, alkaloids. Microbial transfor-
mation, Bioleaching, Fermentation economics.
BIO G517 Recombinant DNA Technology 3*
The course deals with theoretical aspects of recombinant DNA
manipulation. Emphasis will be placed on procedures to create
chemeric molecules using examples from actual experimental
work. Vector designing, polymerase chain reaction, invitro mu-
tagenesis and cloning in prokaryotic and eukaryotic vectors will
be covered.
VI-4
BIO G522 Interferon Technology 3 1 4
Characterization, Functional activity, broad pleiotropic agents,
antiviral, anti-angiogenic, antitumor, anti-proliferative, immuno-
modulatory effect, specific receptor binding, mechanisms, se-
quencing, classification, Dosage formulation Therapeutic study,
side effects, molecular manipulation and activity profile.
BIO G523 Advanced and Applied Microbiology 3 2 5
Molecular taxonomy, Systematic Microbiology; Study of molecular
diversity of microorganisms, clinical microbiology, human-microbe
interaction, molecular plant-microbe interaction, applied microbi-
ology and synthetic microbiology.
BIO G524 Animal Cell Technology 3 2 5
Animal cell and tissue culture from various organisms, types of
cell lines, development and maintenance of cell lines, manipula-
tion and applications of cell culture technology for Biotechnolog-
ical research and therapeutics implication.
BIO G525 Environmental Biotechnology and Waste 3 2 5
Management
Applications of biotechnology to the management of environ-
mental problems, role of biotechnology in increasing plant and
animal production through biological insecticides, herbicide re-
sistance, mineral cycling, conservation of genetic resources and
biological nitrogen-fixation. Use of biotechnological processes in
pollution control, bioremediation of toxicants, treatment of do-
mestic and industrial waste will be emphasized. Ethical issues
related with the release of genetically modified organisms would
also be covered.
BIO G526 Cancer Biology 3 2 5
Basic concepts and molecular basis of cancer, Growth, Regula-
tion and Metastasis, Cancer Immune system Interaction, Can-
cer therapy, Cancer and Environment, Cancer and society.
BIO G532 Biostatistics and Biomodelling 3 1 4
Probability analysis variables in biology; standard deviation and
standard errors; correlation and correlation coefficient; regres-
sion analysis; significance test; chi-square and goodness of fit;
applications of computers in statistics; handling of software on
enzyme kinetics and protein sequence analysis; computer anal-
ysis of nucleic acid structure.
BIO G541 Neural Network Analysis 5
Basic concepts, Characteristics of nerve cells and neurons, Def-
inition of artificial neurons, Algorithms, network topology and
functions, Neural network application for learning, expert sys-
tems, knowledge representation, speech recognitions and syn-
thesis, visual perception and pattern recognition and language
processing: Emphasis will be on a comparative study with bio-
logical systems.
BIO G542 Advanced Cell and Molecular Biology 5
Eukaryotic cell cycle: restriction point, G1 phase progression,
role of cyclins, cancer cell cycles; growth factors and their inter-
action with receptors: PDGF, EGF, VEGF, FGF, TGF; stress re-
sponses: mechanisms molecular biology with special reference
to hypoxia; extracelular matrix and adhesion molecules; cyto-
kines: sources, molecular structure, targets and mechanisms of
action; apoptosis, caspases and necrosis.
BIO G544 Bioremediation and Bio-metallurgy 5
Applications of microbial metabolism for removal of toxic mate-
rial from environmental sample and recovery of metals from low
grade ore; metal- microbe interaction, comparison of conven-
tional and microbe based processes of treating toxic waste ma-
terial; steps in bioremediation processes such as preparation of
biomass through genetic manipulations, immobilization, batch or
continuous processes;applications of microbes in bioleaching
process and recovery of copper, gold and nickel with case stud-
ies.
BIO G545 Molecular Parasitology & Vector Biology 5
V
Biology of parasitic diseases and their transmission in human
and animal population by vectors/carriers. molecular aspects of
parasite and vector biology, modes of infection, life cycles of
parasite and vector, host - parasite interactions, infectivity pat-
tern, mechanisms of drug resistance and immune evasion,
methods of diagnosis, prophylaxis, treatments to parasitic dis-
eases and vector control measures.
BIO G551 Membrane Biology 5
Concepts of biological membrane, Membrane constituents
phospholipids, glycolipids and cholesterol; Membrane bilayers,
amphipathic molecules, Self-assembly process; Membrane pro-
teins, lateral and transverse diffusion, fluid mosaic model,
Membrane permeability; Organization and dynamics of mem-
brane, Signal transduction, role of carbohydrate components of
membrane, Red-cell membrane proteins, Tools and techniques
in membrane study: electron microscope, X-ray study, autoradi-
ography and spectrometry. Immune response, Surface proper-
ties, Kinetics of membrane-bound processes.
BIO G561 Advances in Recombinant DNA Technology 3 2 5
Recent advances in high--‐throughput genomics, proteomics
and large--‐scale mutagenesis; genomics techniques like tran-
scriptome arrays and arrays for whole genome analysis; prote-
omics analysis techniques like 2D PAGE and MS; understand-
ing genome and protein structures and protein interactions
through yeast/bacterial two--‐hybrid systems; large scale muta-
genesis and interference.
BIO G570 Recent Developments in Biology 1 0 1
The students will be exposed to recent advances / research in
the area including but not restricted to animal, plants or microbi-
al systems. There will be emphasis placed on understanding the
applications and benefits of the in silico and/or wet lab ap-
proaches to the selected topics.
BIO G612 Human Genetics 3 2 5
Epigenetic and Chromosomal Control of Gene Expression: DNA
methylation, Genomic imprinting and mammalian development.
DNA damage & repair: Damage control during replication and
mitosis, Genome stability and checkpoint control, Disorders re-
lated to aberrant DNA repair. Molecular genetics of inherited
disorders. Cancer genetics: Genetic analysis of various can-
cers, tumor suppressor genes, metabolic polymorphisms and
cancer susceptibility. Genomics & Proteomics: Human genome
project and its applications in Gene therapy, novel drug design
approaches.
BIO G631 Membrane and Liposome Tech. 3 1 4
Membrane structure and biogenesis: techniques for the study of
membrane structure and properties; model of membranes; mo-
lecular transport mechanisms; techniques of artificial membrane
productions; liposomes - structure and characteristics; carrier
mechanisms for targeting therapeutic agents; industrial applica-
tions of liposomes.
BIO G632 Transgenic Technology 3 2 5
Transgenic techniques as replacements of traditional breeding
practices; understanding faulty gene pool; development of
commercial and economically viable tissue culture and their ge-
netic improvement through r-DNA strategies; development of
recombinant transplants for improved genomic system.
BIO G641 Cell & Tissue Culture Technology 2 2 4
Plant and animal cell culture from various organism; types of
cell lines; development and maintenance of cell lines; tissue cul-
ture for viral growth, hybridization and gene manipulation; hy-
bridoma technology and protoplast fusion.
BIO G642 Experimental Techniques 4
Specially designed laboratory course which aims to impart train-
ing in selected range of techniques such as, salt fractionation,
dialysis, PAGE with discontinuous buffer solution, Western Blot-
ting, Ion-exchange chromatography and Gel filtration, Genomic
DNA extraction from Human Blood, bacteria, purification of DNA
and analysis, polymerase chain reaction, single, double and
partial restriction digestion, construction of genomic DNA library,
Southern Blotting, Karyotyping, short term lymphocyte culture,
VI-5
RNA extraction and quantification.
BIO G643 Plant Biotechnology 3 2 5
Plant cell and tissue culture, media constituents, micro propaga-
tion and other culture techniques, their applications and limita-
tions, germplasm storage, secondary metabolite production,
therapeutic protein and antibody production through plants,
promoter designing and inducible promoters, molecular markers
and their applications, approaches to influence metabolite parti-
tioning and quality and quantity of plant storage products.
BIO G651 Protein and Enzyme Bioengineering 3 2 5
Sources, isolation, purification and storage of protein and/or en-
zymes; kinetics of enzyme catalyzed reactions; biocatalyst reac-
tion engineering; techniques of production and recovery of en-
zymes; protein and enzyme modification; clinical and industrial
applications of free and immobilized enzymes.
BIO G661 Gene Toxicology 3 1 4
Origin and fundamentals of Gene Toxicity; genotoxic effects in
plants and mammalian systems; screening and measurements
of genetoxicants; techniques in gene toxicology and their appli-
cation to human, agricultural and environmental monitoring.
BIO G671 Bioconversion Technology 3 2 5
Waste and by-product utilization; downstream processing; bio-
gas production; principles of biodegradation process parame-
ters; bioreactor design and operation; exploitation of waste
streams enzyme-based bioconversions of high value products.
Biotechnology
BIOT F211 Biological Chemistry 3 0 3
Chemistry and functions of constituents of cells and tissues; in-
troduction to enzymes; metabolism of carbohydrates, lipids,
aminoacids; nucleic acids and protein synthesis; vitamins and
hormones.
BIOT F212 Microbiology 3 1 4
Introduction and classification of microbes; structure and physi-
ology of microbial cell; infection and immunity; host parasite re-
lationship; microbiology of milk, air, water and food; physical
and chemical methods of controlling microbes; experiments for
isolation, cultivation, physiological and biochemical characteri-
zation of microbes.
BIOT F213 Cell Biology 3 0 3
Fundamental processes of life at cellular and sub-cellular levels,
cell environments, membrane transport, cell movements, divi-
sion and control mechanisms.
BIOT F215 Biophysics 3 0 3
A study of molecules and their interaction forces; bioenergetics
and physical techniques as applied to biological phenomena.
BIOT F241 Genetic Engineering Techniques 1 3 4
Experiments on the common molecular biology techniques used
in gene manipulation in bacteria and plants; gene cloning pro-
cedure in bacteria – from isolation of plasmids to screening of
recombinant clones; polymerase chain reaction (PCR) and its
applications; gene and protein expression analysis; DNA se-
quencing; Agrobacterium-mediated gene transfer in plants and
introduction to plant cell culture techniques; Use of software for
molecular biology.
BIOT F242 Introduction to Bioinformatics 3 0 3
Introduction to genomics and proteomics, human genome and
other sequencing projects, biological databases and data min-
ing, sequence similarity search and sequence alignment, pro-
tein structure prediction and structure analysis, use of software
packages in Bioinformatics.
BIOT F243 Genetics 3 0 3
Facts and theories of heredity, their relation to the present state
of biological theory in general; elements of population genetics;
genetics and species concept.
BIOT F244 Instrumental Methods of Analysis 1 3 4
V
Principles, configuration, applications of instruments like mass
spectrophotometer, NMR, UV, IR, X-ray apparatus, atomic
spectrophotometer, gas chromatography, liquid scintillation
spectrophotometer, laser device, high voltage electrophoresis,
ultracentrifuge, DTA, TGA, etc.
BIOT F245 Introduction to Environmental Biotechnol- 3 0 3
ogy
Industrial processes, incorporating design and monitoring of
waste treatment technologies; microbial removal and degrada-
tion of organics pollutants, phytoremediation of soil and water
contaminated with toxic metals and radionuclides, wetlands as
treatment processes, biofilms, biofilters for vapor-phase wastes,
and composting; biosensors in environmental analysis, molecu-
lar biology applications in environmental engineering and genet-
ic engineering of organisms for bioremediation.
BIOT F266 Study Project 3
These courses include projects which are oriented towards
readings from published literature or books about new frontiers
of development or analysis of available database. These cours-
es are normally available to students in second or higher levels.
These courses must coterminate with project reports.
BIOT F311 Recombinant DNA Technology 3 0 3
The course deals with theoretical aspects of recombinant DNA
manipulation. Emphasis will be placed on procedures to create
chemeric molecules using examples from actual experimental
work. Vector designing, polymerase chain reaction, invitro mu-
tagenesis and cloning in prokaryotic and eukaryotic vectors will
be covered.
BIOT F314 Industrial Microbiology and Bio process 2 2 4
Engineering
Principles and application of fermentation technology with re-
spect to production of value added biotechnological products
and strategies of improving production; development of biologi-
cal processes associated with raw materials preparation to
product recovery, relevant to industries as diverse as medical,
food and environmental protection.
BIOT F342 Immunology 3 0 3
Introduction to immune system, cell mediated and humoral im-
munity, allergy, mechanisms of hypersensitivity reactions, im-
munity to infectious diseases, immune mechanisms involved in
cancer and transplantation immunology.
BIOT F343 Experiments in Biotechnology 0 3 3
Advanced molecular biology techniques such as genomic DNA
isolation, plasmid DNA, single, double & partial digestion, con-
struction of genomic DNA library, PCR, polymorphism in studies,
southern blotting, RNA isolation, Real Time PCR, protein expres-
sion and analysis and immuno-histochemical techniques.
BIOT F344 Downstream Processing 2 1 3
Recovery and purification of biologically – produced products
including biomass itself, extracellular and intracellular compo-
nents; Strategies to recover and purify products, separation of
insoluble products, cell disruption, separation of soluble prod-
ucts, finishing steps for purification, integration of reaction and
separation.
BIOT F345 Proteomics 3 0 3
This course deals with the introduction to proteome, significance
and analysis of post-translational modification of proteins, pro-
tein-protein interaction. Functions of all protein will be discussed
in light of the standard prokaryotic and eukaryotic models. Em-
phasis will be given on methods of proteomic research, proteo-
me analysis, resolution and identification of proteins.
BIOT F346 Genomics 3 0 3
This course provides an introduction to the field of genomics. It
also covers the structure of the human genome, and the strate-
gies that were used to map and sequence the genome, and de-
tails how genomic sequence information is utilized for phar-
macogenomics, drug discovery and diagnostics. The course al-
so introduces post-genomics technologies such as bioinformat-
ics, functional genomics and comparative genomics.
VI-6
BIOT F347 Immunotechnology 3 0 3
Immunotechnology is a specialised course, which deals with bi-
otechnological aspects of immunological mechanisms Hybrido-
ma technology and production of monoclonal antibodies, anti-
body engineering using genetic manipulations, alternatives to
hybridoma technology for monoclonal antibodies, designing and
building of mAb genes, primary and secondary libraries for anti-
body genes. Emphasis will be given on the production of hu-
manized and human antibodies. Uses of monoclonal antibodies
in diagnosis, therapy of allergic diseases, vaccine production,
abzyme, purification, quantification and cytogenetic analysis.
BIOT F352 Cell and Tissue Culture Technology 3 0 3
This course will provide an introduction to theory and application
of tissue culture technologies. The details of animal and plant
tissue culture will be covered including design of media and
large scale production of the animal and plant cells. The course
also covers the various techniques of preserving the animal cell
lines.
BIOT F366 Lab Project 3
BIOT F367 Lab Project 3
These courses include projects involving laboratory investiga-
tion or laboratory development in the students discipline or in-
terdisciplinary areas. These courses are normally available to
students in third or higher levels. These courses must cotermi-
nate with project reports.
BIOT F376 Design Project 3
BIOT F377 Design Project 3
These courses are intended to impart training in design of prod-
uct/ process or other artifact to the students in the discipline or
interdisciplinary areas. These courses are normally available to
students in third or higher levels. These courses must cotermi-
nate with project reports.
BIOT F413 Molecular Biology of the Cell 3 0 3
This course is designed to impart knowledge of molecular biolo-
gy of the cell. Students will understand the various concepts re-
lated to cell structure and function at molecular level. : Molecu-
lar biology and nucleus, ultrastructure and cytochemical studies,
membrane structure and function. Organelle involved in intracel-
lular transport and cell signaling , cell sorting Cell junctions and
adhesion molecules, Cell division and the Cell Cycle.
BIOT F416 Introduction to Pharmaceutical Biotech- 3 0 3
nology
The course is designed to provide advances in drug develop-
ment, drug delivery systems and pharmaceutical specialties in-
cluding polypeptides, proteins, viruses, DNA and antibiotics. It
covers relevant aspects for the development of new bi technol-
ogy based drugs, target identification, downstream processing
and formulation. Special emphasis is given on understanding
the mechanisms and process involved in diseases.
BIOT F417 Biomolecular Modeling 3 0 3
The course is designed to provide students the first hand expe-
rience of potential utility of biomolecular modeling especially in
concurrent pharmaceutical research, and in cell and structural
biology. It describes the functionality, advantages, and limita-
tions of standard computing strategies for the simulation of bio-
molecules. Biomolecular Conformation, Structural genomics
and Proteomics, Protein folding, Forecefield, simulation, Con-
formational analysis ,abinitio structure predictioncomparative
modeling, lattice models, usage of modeling packages.
BIOT F420 Introduction to Plant Biotechnology 3 0 3
Introduction to plant tissue culture, Micropropagation,
Somaclonal variation, meristem culture, Anther culture, Cell
suspension culture, Secondary metabolite production, Proto-
plast isolation and Fusion, cryopreservation, Techniques for
Plant Transformation – Agrobacterium and Biolistics, Transgen-
ics in crop Improvement.
BIOT F422 Nanobiotechnology 3 0 3
The course deals with the principles and application of nano-
and micro-fabrication methods to build tools for exploring the bi-
ological systems. The course includes interdisciplinary aspects
V
of biology and nanotechnology on the principles of microfabrica-
tion techniques with a focus on nanoparticles, drug delivery sys-
tems, and interations with molecular and cellular level for bio-
medical and biological research applications.
BIOT F423 Drug design and delivery 3 0 3
The objective of this course is to give insight into the principles
of drug discovery and molecular mechanism of drug action. The
course is designed for applications in the pharmaceutical and
biotechnology related to identifying and optimizing a drug can-
didate for clinical development. Special emphasis is given on ra-
tional and systematic approaches to the development of novel
classes of drugs against diseases and effective treatment.
BIOT F424 Food Biotechnology 3 0 3
The course gives an overview on presence of microorganisms,
their activity and control in food. It explores the scientific meth-
ods for measuring microorganisms and their products. Preser-
vation techniques of foods, food safety, quality controls and
food borne diseases are also discussed. The course also co-
vers food fermentation and use of various microorganisms in
preparation of fermented foods at industrial level.
BIOT F491 Special Project 3
Course description is same as “BIO F491”
BITS
BITS F111 Thermodynamics 3 0 3
Concepts and laws of thermodynamics; macroscopic thermody-
namic properties; application to closed and open system; micro-
scopic approach to entropy; equations of state; thermodynamics
of nonreacting mixtures.
BITS F112 Technical Report Writing 2 0 2
Overview of communication, elements of effective writing, for-
mal reports, types of reports, preparatory steps for writing re-
ports, methods and sources of data, use of illustrations, oral
presentation.
BITS F113 General Mathematics I 3 0 3
I. Review of coordinate geometry, Theory of equations, Pro-
gression and series, permutations and combinations, Binomial
theorem, Functions: Trigonometric (with identities), Transcen-
dental.
II. One Dimensional Calculus: Limit and continuity, Differentia-
tion, Integration. Applications of derivatives and definite integra-
tion.
BITS F114 General Mathematics II 3 0 3
I. Polar coordinates, Function of several variables, Multiple inte-
grals, Vector valued functions.
II. Complex functions and their analyticity.
III. First order and second order ordinary differential equations,
Laplace transformations and its applications to ordinary differen-
tial equations.
BITS F201 Material Science and Engineering 3 0 3
Introduction on materials for engineering, structures of metals,
ceramics and polymers; crystalline structure imperfections;
amorphous and semi-crystalline materials (includes glasses, in-
troduction to polymers); Correlation of structure to properties
and engineering functions (mechanical, chemical, electrical,
magnetic and optical); phase diagrams; Improving properties by
controlled solidification, diffusion or heat treatment; Failure
analysis and non-destructive testing; Types of materials (in-
cludes synthesis, Fabrication and processing of materials): Pol-
ymers and composites, Environmental degradation of materials
(corrosion); Evolution of materials (functional materials, Biomi-
metic materials, energy saving materials etc); Criteria for mate-
rial selection.
BITS F211 Introduction to IPR 1
Importance & relevance of IPR’s in the globalised era; legisla-
tion covering IPR’s in India; patents, copyrights, trademarks, in-
dustrial designs, trade secrets, geographical indications; proce-
dures for filing IPR’s in India, WTO, TRIPS agreement and their
relevance to agriculture, industry education and service sector
VI-7
and others.
BITS F212 Introduction to Human Rights 1
Relevance of human rights education in India: evolution of hu-
man rights and duties, human rights: international norms, hu-
man rights and duties in India, redressal mechanisms for human
rights violations, deprivation of human rights: core issues; wom-
en and human rights and duties, good governance, science and
technology and human rights.
BITS F213 Introduction to Environmental Studies 1
Ecosystems, evolution and biodiversity; impact of population
and economic growth on the environment; sustainable devel-
opment and use of resources such as water, food, and energy;
environmental quality – waste management, air and water pollu-
tion, hazards such as global warming, ozone layer depletion,
acid rain, and nuclear accidents; sustaining environmental quali-
ty- economic, social, political and ethical issues.
BITS F214 Science, Technology and Modernity 3 0 3
Interrelationship between science, technology and modern so-
ciety; forms in which beliefs and values of a modern society
shape sciences and technologies; forms in which scientific dis-
coveries and technological developments influence and shape
modern societies. Scientific Revolution and the emergence of
modernity as a social condition; Enlightenment promise of pro-
gress within the economic system of capitalism. Some critiques
of the received view; recent phase of capitalism and the role of
technology in globalization.
BITS F215 Applications of Bio-Medical Instrumenta- 2 0 2
tion Techniques in Healthcare
Introduction to biomechanics, neuro-prosthetics based on func-
tion- sensory, motor, neuro prosthetics; based on regulation-
person, auto regulated as adjuncts or alternates to therapy, im-
plants, prosthetics for vision, audition, pain relief, pharmako-
kinetic studies, brain-machine interface –methods, rapid proto-
typing technique in developing artificial bones, tissues, tendons,
cartilages, and various applications of these techniques in im-
provement of health-care.
BITS F217 Environment, Development and Climate 3 0 3
Change
Specific topics on environment, development and climate
change; regional, national and international climate debates; re-
view of international climate negotiations such as Kyoto, Co-
penhagen and other declarations; environment problems: caus-
es, sustainability and policies; population, resources and sus-
tainability; population dynamics, capacity and conservation;
food security, poverty, impact and global solutions; energy re-
sources: renewable, wind, oil, natural gas, nuclear energy;
growth, technology and greenhouse gas emissions, carbon
credit; regional impacts of climate change and adaptation strat-
egies; techniques in modeling; water resources and pollution:
monsoon, drought, rainwater harvesting, traditional practices in
water conservation; case studies.
BITS F218 General Mathematics III 3 0 3
Linear equations and matrices, Determinants, Basis of Rn, Eig-
en Value, Eigen Vector, Linear transformations on Rn.
Linear Programming: Geometric Solutions, Simplex Method,
Duality, Post optimal Analysis, Transportation and Assignment
Problem. Nonlinear Programming (Unconstrained optimization).
BITS F219 Process Engineering 2 1 3
Basic concepts related to heat transfer, mass transfer and flow
of fluid, processes and equipment involved in extraction and fil-
tration; mixing and granulation; size reduction and classification,
evaporation and distillation, drying and crystallization, humidifi-
cation and dehumidification. Materials of construction. Theory of
compression and consolidation of solids.
BITS F221 Practice School I 5
BITS F225 Environmental Studies 3 3 0
3
Environment, human population, and industrialization; natural
resources and the impact of man-made activities on them;
structure and function of ecosystem, population ecology, biodi-
versity and its conservation, overview of natural resources, envi-
V
ronmental pollution, social issues and the environment, and en-
vironmental impact assessment.
BITS F226 Soft Skills for Professionals 3 0 3
Social Skills: Personality development, Emotionalintelligence,
Etiquette. Study Skills: CommunicationSkills, Academic writing
Presentations and PublicSpeaking, Interviews, Group Discus-
sion. CareerPlanning Skills: Creative thinking, Ethical Val-
ues,Capacity Building: Learn Unlearn & Re-
learn/Domainknowledge, Leadership and Team Manage-
ment,Decision making/ Negotiation, Time and StressManage-
ment.
BITS F231 Practice School I 5
All the above courses are run during the summer term only. The
operation of all these three courses will be identical in nature.
However, BITS F221 will be a required course for all integrated
First Degree students with Practice School option. This course
is also a prerequisite for BITS F412 Practice School II. BITS
F231 may be available only to those students who have suc-
cessfully cleared BITS F221 and BITS F241 may be available
only to those students who have successfully cleared BITS
F231. Thus BITS F231 and BITS F241 can be taken by highly
motivated students if facilities are available after satisfying the
needs of students who have to compulsorily register in BITS
F221.
BITS F232 Foundations of Data Structures and Algo- 3 1 4
rithms
Algorithm Analysis – Mathematical preliminaries, Sorting Algo-
rithms, Search Algorithms, Linear Structures, Non-Linear Struc-
tures, Hashing, Non-Linear Structures, Graphs and Algorithms.
(Open elective for non-B.E. Computer Science students)
BITS F233 Essentials of Start-up 3*
Problem Identification and Opportunity Discovery through De-
sign Thinking; Deep understanding of Customer and Markets;
Market size estimation; Create a Compelling Value Proposition;
Competitive Advantage; Build your minimum viable product
(MVP); Lean principles in Startup; Build the Product Roadmap;
Financial Feasibility; Go-to-Market Strategy; Managing growth
and Targeting Scale; Funding Strategy.
BITS F234 Introduction to Engineering Design 4*
Introduction to Engineering Design is a significant contributor in
teaching students how to transform a concept into a tangible re-
ality, in order to test - with confidence - tangible realities by sim-
ulating real-world conditions. In this course, students will devel-
op fundamental CAD skills in both the 2D realm (e.g. building
plans or circuit design) and the 3D realm (e.g. using fully ma-
nipulable animated models that are invaluable tools for visualis-
ing complex mechanisms). They will also improve their skills
and knowledge in drawing techniques, learn to use specific
tools, and learn about the design process. They will also learn
how Indian and Australian standards define the common lan-
guage of graphic communication. These graphically presented
virtual realities will also extend into the realm of augmented re-
ality, in which simulations and the real world combine for a total-
ly immersive design experience.
Equivalent: OENG1250 Introduction to Engineering Design of-
fered at RMIT.
BITS F235 Digital Fundamentals 4*
This course is focused on digital literacies for engineers and will
equip students with the ability to apply a problem-solving meth-
odology to common engineering problems. Using a problem-
based approach, students will develop the skills to design, write,
test and debug programmes that improve the world we live in.
They will be presented with various types of engineering prob-
lems which they will then work through from problem identifica-
tion and algorithm design through to the implementation phase.
As part of this course, they will also be introduced to the syntax
and development environment of the engineering software tool
MATLAB/Simulink. This course establishes a foundation for en-
gineering programmes that require advanced programming and
problem-solving skills such as Electrical & Electronic, Computer
& Network, Mechatronic and Automotive Engineering.
Equivalent: OENG1206 Digital Fundamentals offered at RMIT
VI-8
offered at RMIT.
BITS F236 Foundations of Artificial Intelligence for 4*
STEM
This course introduces the foundations of Artificial Intelligence
(AI) tailored to students from a range of health, science, tech-
nology, engineering, and math disciplines. AI is a branch of
computer science devoted to developing intelligent hardware
and software systems. Applications of AI are now widespread in
the world of work. It is therefore increasingly important for all
health, science, technology, engineering, and math disciplines
graduates to have an understanding of the foundations and ap-
plications of the field of AI relevant to their own discipline. This
course will also challenge the students to consider the impact
and ethics of AI on their future profession and society.
Equivalent: COSC2960 Foundations of Artificial Intelligence for
STEM.
BITS F237 STEM for Sustainable Development 4*
This course provides students with an introduction, understand-
ing and appreciation of sustainability as applied in contemporary
Health and Science, Technology, Engineering and Mathematics
(STEM) (including holistic, integrative and interdisciplinary con-
sideration of the sustainable development goals, priorities and
future sustainability trends in relation to STEM and health. The
course will explore the nexus between topics such as environ-
mental sustainability, climate change, biodiversity, health, food
and nutrition and energy and transport and the application of
sustainable sciences and technologies such as low carbon
technologies, circular and digital economies and advanced
manufacturing. Sharing and communication of diverse view-
points and expertise from across the STEM and health disci-
plines will be facilitated to enable collaborative action to address
real world sustainability problems. This course will also explore
how diversity, inclusion, reconciliation and equity act as driving
forces within sustainability and promote and enable diverse
voices to be heard and activated to co-create sustainable fu-
tures for society and the environment. Ultimately, the course will
encourage and enable the students to bring a sustainability fo-
cus, approach and agency into their future studies and resulting
careers.
Equivalent: ONPS2702 STEM for Sustainable Development of-
fered at RMIT.
BITS F311 Image Processing 3 0 3
Introduction to Image Processing and Imaging systems,
Image sampling, Transforms, Enhancement and Resto-
ration, Coding and Communications, Image Compres-
sion, Image understanding, Neural network and PR Ap-
proaches.
BITS F312 Neural Networks and Fuzzy Logic 3 0 3
Introduction to neural networks, neural dynamics; activations
and signals; activation models; unsupervised and supervised
learning rules and their domain of applications; architectures of
neural systems; Fuzzy sets, fuzzy binary relations; fuzzy logic,
fuzzy reasoning; applications in decision making, control theory,
adaptive fuzzy and neural control systems and their compari-
son; Concepts in control systems : stability, state variable, con-
trollability, regression and optimization; mathematical models in
control; conventional controllers : design, tuning; Relations, de-
sign of fuzzy control systems; control using ANN; Hybrid control,
Neuro-fuzzy, GA and bio-inspired optimized control; Case stud-
ies on applications of neural, fuzzy and hybrid techniques.
BITS F313 Multicriterion Decision Making in Engi- 3 0 3
neering and Management
Introduction, Single Objective Optimization, Estimation of
weights, Multiobjective optimization, Classification Methods,
Discrete Multicriterion Decision Making, Fuzzy Logic based dis-
crete MCDM, Correlation coefficients and group decision mak-
ing, Advanced topics of decision making, Case studies.
BITS F314 Game Theory and Its Applications 3 0 3
Strategic thinking, Rational choice, Dominance, Rationalizabil-
ity, Nash equilibrium, Best response functions, Duopoly models
and Nash equilibrium therein, Electoral competition, Pure strat-
egy, Mixed strategy, Extensive forms, Sub-game perfect Nash
V
equilibrium, Bayesian Nash equilibrium, Select Applications of
Game Theory.
BITS F315 Introduction to Cognitive Neuroscience 3 0 3
Introduction, Methods of Cognitive Neuroscience, Sensation
and Perception, Attention & Action, Memory, Emotions, Psycho-
linguistics, Network Neuroscience, Consumer Neuroscience,
Social Cognition and Metacognition.
BITS F316 Nonlinear Dynamics and Chaos 3 0 3
Chaos – definitions, characteristics, and measures; Examples of
chaotic systems; Nonlinear dynamics and chaos – state space,
Poincare sections, Iterated maps, Period-doubling; Quasi-
periodicity, Intermittency, fractals; computer simulations of cha-
otic systems; Selected topics and applications of chaos theory;
Examples will be drawn from different disciplines in science,
engineering, and social sciences.
BITS F317 Theoretical Neuroscience 3 3 0 3
Introduction to nervous system: Neurons; central and peripheral
nervous systems; nerves; ganglions; brain areas; Neural circuits
– few examples; Single neuron modelling: Electrical properties
of a neuron; Action potential; Integrate and fire mod-
els;Conductance based models - Hodgkin-Huxley model, Mor-
ris-Lecar model; Cable equation; Multicompartment models for
dendrites; Models for synapses; FitzHugh-Nagumo model; Net-
works of neurons: Feed forward network; Recurrent networks;
Excitatory-Inhibitory networks; Stochastic networks; Encoding
and decoding:Firing rate; Spike-train statistics; Receptive
fields;Reverse correlation methods; Static nonlineari-
ties;Discrimination; Population decoding; Spike-train decoding;
Shannon entropy; Mutual information;Entropy maximization and
information; Current trends in theoretical neuroscience.
BITS F319 Negotiation Skills and Techniques 2 0 2
Overview, Negotiation styles, Negotiation process, Tactics in
Negotiation, Handling conflicts in negotiation, Best Alternative to
a Negotiated Agreement, Communication - Key to Effective Ne-
gotiating, Non-verbal communication in Negotiations, Emotions:
dealing with others and ourselves, International negotiations,
Cross Cultural Issues in Negotiations, Power in negotiation,
Workplace Negotiations, Turning Negotiation into a Corporate
Capability, Do’s and Don’ts of Negotiations, Negotiating over
the telephone/ Electronic media, Ethics in negotiation, Negotia-
tion-Exercise.
BITS F319 Negotiation Skills and Techniques 2 0 2
Overview, Negotiation styles, Negotiation process, Tactics in
Negotiation, Handling conflicts in negotiation, Best Alternative to
a Negotiated Agreement, Communication - Key to Effective Ne-
gotiating, Non-verbal communication in Negotiations, Emotions:
dealing with others and ourselves, International negotiations,
Cross Cultural Issues in Negotiations, Power in negotiation,
Workplace Negotiations, Turning Negotiation into a Corporate
Capability, Do’s and Don’ts of Negotiations, Negotiating over
the telephone/ Electronic media, Ethics in negotiation, Negotia-
tion-Exercise.
BITS F320 Managerial Skills 2*
The role of manager, team building and goal setting, basics of
supervision, leadership, decision making, negotiation skills and
techniques, how managers communicate, how to interview, pro-
cess of induction, training and development, delegation, how to
appraise employees, how to manage time, use of committees,
how to handle meetings, how to handle complaints.
BITS F321 Legal and Economic Environment of 4*
Business
Indian contracts act, sale of goods act, negotiable instruments
act, companies act, corporate tax laws, consumer protection
and unfair trade practices act, FEMA, Industrial policy, macroe-
conomic environment, fiscal and monetary policy, overview of
Indian economy, economic indicators.
BITS F322 Venture Team Development and Organi-
zation 3 0 3
Building and managing high performance teams; Multidiscipli-
nary teams; Virtual teams; Homogeneity and diversity in teams;
Team building – inspiration , interdependence, interaction and
VI-9
integrity; Leadership; Motivation; Compensation and ESOPs;
Negotiation Skills and techniques; Interpersonal skills; Commu-
nication skills; Conflict Management; Decision making; SMART
goals; Perception and bias; Cultural and emotional intelligence;
Permanent and contingent workforce; Causes and remedies of
dysfunctional teams.
BITS F323 Venture Finance 3 0 3
Developing Financial Projections, Alternate forms of Financing,
Venture Financing Decisions, Business Valuation and Equity
Financing; Angel and Venture Capital Funds; Financing
for Growth, IPO and Exit.
BITS F324 Strategy for Entrepreneurs 3 0 3
Developing vision, mission, goals, objectives for an enterprise;
Internal and external business environment; Formulating a
business model; New entry strategy; Assessing market seg-
ments and competition; Blue ocean strategy and red ocean
strategy; Investor profile; Porter’s generic strategies and five
forces model; Boston Consulting Group (BCG) matrix; SWOT
analysis; General Electrical Matrix; Core competency; Growth
strategies; Stability strategies; Renewal strategies; Indirect as-
sault strategies; Competitor growth limiting strategies; Function-
al strategies; Strategic myopia.
BITS F325 New Product and Service Design 3 0 3
New product and service design: standardization, mass custom-
ization, delayed differentiation, modular design, and robust de-
sign. Defining requirements and specifications. Technical, busi-
ness and financial feasibility of design. Prototyping, manufactur-
ing and testing. Product and Service lifecycle. Customer satis-
faction and sustainability. Reliability. Legal and Ethical consid-
erations.
BITS F326 Design Thinking for Innovation & Entre- 3 0 3
preneurship
Design thinking and innovation mind-set; Creative confidence;
Design thinking process; Design thinking – need finding and
empathy; Idea generation; Prototyping and experimentation;
Human centred design ethos; Innovation through brainstorming;
Innovation through prototyping; Innovation by design; Case
studies for innovation in all spheres: product, service, business,
finance/investments, marketing; Designing a startup; Designing
in teams; Designing to use; Design thinking in innovation to
handle the unexpected; Innovating within the framework of en-
trepreneurship.
BITS F327 Artificial Intelligence for Robotics 2 1 3
Introduction to AI, Application of AI in Robotics. Introduction to
Robot Operating Systems (ROS), Python and programming with
application of Raspberry-Pi and Arduino. Practical Robot Design
Process, implementation of pick and place process. Basic robot
sensing techniques (Vision and Listening), Beam Models of
Range Finders, sensor models. Object Recognition Using Neu-
ral Networks and Supervised Learning. Robot learning process,
Reinforcement learning and Genetic Algorithms. Basic concepts
of speech recognition and natural language. Path planning,
SLAM, decision trees, classification techniques, wave front, the
A* (A star) and D* (D star) algorithms, and node-based plan-
ners. Non-deterministic simulation technique and Monte Carlo
modeling, the Robot Emotion Engine, the Human Emotion
Model.
BITS F328 Innovation Ecosystem and the Future of 4*
Work
This course deals with the concepts of innovator in study, work
and life. This course will broaden and strengthen student’s in-
novation effectiveness. Students will discover how technology,
society, governments, and global trends drive change in the fu-
ture of work over the span of their career. Students will gain a
holistic view of innovation - of self, others, and the task. Under-
stand how bringing people and project together in innovation
ecosystems brings new ideas to life, strategically delivering an
innovation's true value into the hands of adopters. The course is
richly illustrated with fast-paced interactive learning activities
and topics. Concepts will be brought to life through stories from
alumni students, STEM industry leaders both locally and inter-
national. The engaging workshops, serious games and as-
sessment will bring the topics together and provide them with
VI
the opportunity to apply their discipline insight as they build their
skills and knowledge.
Whether students are a collaborator or leader in innovation,
both the skills and an innovators mindset are highly valued by
industry. Yet, student’s may find that it is of more significant
personal value as a strategy for a resilient, vibrant, and fulfilling
career in a future of accelerating change.
Equivalent: OENG1235 Innovation Ecosystem and the Future of
Work offered at RMIT.
BITS F329 Social and Environmental Applications of 3*
Data Science
The course will provide a platform for students to apply data
science principles, techniques, and tools to solve problems re-
lated to climate and health. The course will expose students to
real life problems. The course will also allow students to corre-
late climate change to health. The applications will be inherently
inter-disciplinary in nature, and could involve co-supervision by
BITS Pilani faculty in departments other than CSIS.
This is a projects-based course for imparting hands-on experi-
ence of Data Science for Climate and Health. Students will work
in groups and undertake 2 projects: one focused on Data Sci-
ence either for Climate or Health (termed DS(C) or DS(H)); and
a second project focused on Data Science for Climate and
Health (termed DS(CH)).
BITS F331 Quantum Computation and nformation I 3 0 3
History and scope, introduction to quantum information, quan-
tum bits (qubits), quantum parallelism, teleportation etc; Basic
ideas of quantum systems - two-state systems, evolution of
states, superposition, entanglement, quantum measurement,
decoherence; Basic ideas of computation theories and models :
computational resources, complexity; Quantum Gates - single
qubit and multiple qubit gates, controlled gates, universal gates,
measurement; Quantum algorithms - Deutsch’, Shor’s and
Grover’s Algorithms; quantum circuits, quantum Fourier Trans-
form and applications, quantum search algorithm; Physical Im-
plementation of quantum computation Compression and trans-
mission of quantum information, quantum noise, error-
correction, coding and cryptography, complexity, fault-tolerant
computation.
BITS F333 Project on Organisational Aspects 3
These courses involve projects related to thrust areas where
students are expected to get involved with planning, organisa-
tion and execution of new ideas and concepts. These courses
are normally available to students in third or higher levels.
These courses must coterminate with project reports.
BITS F334 Project on Organisational Aspects 3
These courses involve projects related to thrust areas where
students are expected to get involved with planning, organisa-
tion and execution of new ideas and concepts. These courses
are normally available to students in third or higher levels.
These courses must coterminate with project reports.
BITS F343 Fuzzy Logic and Applications 3 0 3
Fuzzy sets, fuzzy binary relations; fuzzy logic, fuzzy reasoning;
applications in decision making, control theory, expert systems,
artificial intelligence etc.
BITS F345 Information Law and Cyber Law 3 0 3
Information related crimes and Cyber-crimes and methods to
contain them; National and International laws and IT acts. Eco-
nomic considerations related to the use and management of
digital data; Legal and policy issues, rights, responsibilities, and
potential liabilities of parties in information exchange and digital
transactions; Cyber laws; Introduction to intellectual property,
IPR, legal and technical aspects; Digital rights management:
Tools, Standards and Techniques.
BITS F351 Nonlinear Dynamics and Chaos 3 0 3
Dissipative systems; Bifurcations in maps & differential equa-
tions (1-d, 2-d, 3-d) – saddle node, transcritical, pitchfork, Hopf,
etc.; Application of bifurcation analysis to various systems in
natural & engineering sciences; Chaos; Routes to chaos; Qua-
siperiodicity; Intermittency; Fractals & strange attractors; Con-
I-10
servative systems.
BITS F364 Human Computer Interaction 3 0 3
Principles of human-computer interaction; Evaluation of user in-
terfaces; Usability engineering; Task analysis, user-centered
design, and prototyping; Conceptual models and metaphors;
Software design rationale; Design of windows, menus, and
commands. Voice and natural language I/O; Response time and
feedback; Color, icons, and sound; Internationalization and lo-
calization; User interface architectures and APIs.
BITS F372 Data Communications and Networks 3 0 3
Communication Concepts; Data and Voice Communications;
Hardware Systems and Configurations; Network Topologies
and Design Aspects; Protocols; Networking Software; Local Ar-
ea Networks; Network Security and Management; Emerging
Trends in Communications.
BITS F381 TIC Projects 3
These courses provide an avenue for first degree students who
are normally in third year or in a higher class, to earn a letter
grade credit for doing projects under the Technology Innovation
Centre. These projects are sponsored by the industries which
come to the Institute under the scheme for participating in
Technology Innovation Centre. The projects are also supervised
and monitored by the personnel from industry who visit as As-
sociate Faculty. These courses are unstructured and would re-
quire all the rigor which the industry would demand.
BITS F382 Reading Course 3
BITS F383 TIC Projects 3
These courses provide an avenue for first degree students who
are normally in third year or in a higher class, to earn a letter
grade credit for doing projects under the Technology Innovation
Centre. These projects are sponsored by the industries which
come to the Institute under the scheme for participating in
Technology Innovation Centre. The projects are also supervised
and monitored by the personnel from industry who visit as As-
sociate Faculty. These courses are unstructured and would re-
quire all the rigor which the industry would demand.
BITS F385 Introduction to Gender Studies 3 0 3
Introduction to gender studies, Sociological theories about gen-
der, Women’s access to education, interest, access and role in
science and technology from gender perspective, Gender bias,
work place, women and employment opportunities, Women and
Politics, women in Panchayati Raj Institutions, women and fami-
ly, women and violence, dowry, women and law, women’s
movements, feminism, women and human rights, women and
media, gender equity-policy issues, women and development.
BITS F386 Quantum Information and Computation 3 0 3
History and scope, introduction to quantum information, quan-
tum bits (qubits), quantum parallelism, teleportation etc. Basic
ideas of quantum systems, two-state systems, evolution of
states, superposition, entanglement, quantum measurement,
decoherence. Basic ideas of computation theories and models,
computational resources, complexity. Quantum Gates: single
qubit, multiple qubit gates, controlled gates, universal gates,
measurement. Quantum algorithms, Deutsch’, Shor’s and
Grover’s Algorithms, quantum circuits. Quantum Fourier Trans-
form and applications, Quantum Search Algorithm. Physical Im-
plementation of quantum computation. Compression and
transmission of quantum information, quantum noise, error-
correction, coding and cryptography, complexity, fault-tolerant
computation.
BITS F398 Creative Multimedia 2 2 3
Imaginative and creative communication skills, interactive mul-
timedia applications incorporating various aspects of rich media;
digital screen design, typography, non linear editing, animation
techniques, sound design and editing, testing and managing
multimedia products, post production techniques.
BITS F399 Humanistic Theories of Science and 3 0 3
Technology
Ways of considering the interrelationship among three of the
major dimensions of our culture: its science, its technology and
its humanistic orientation. Alternative ways of thinking about
VI
science and technology, diverse approaches of humanistic
scholarship to studying science and technology, along with their
historical sources. Approaches by social scientists to analyze
technical fields of science and technology.
BITS F407 Selected Readings 2 0 3
The course is intended to nurture the students critical thinking
and to enhance their skills at information gathering and express-
ing. Selected readings from books in the areas of History, Sci-
ence & Technology, Culture, Literature, Art, Philosophy, Psy-
chology, Religion, Development Concepts and Trends etc. will
be assigned to the students. A set of books will be identified in
at least two broad areas for study and analysis.
BITS F412 Practice School II 20
BITS F413 Practice School II 20
The above two courses will be operated identically with stipulat-
ed prior preparation conditions as per the Academic Regula-
tions. BITS F412 is a required course for all students with Prac-
tice School option either for a single degree or for one of the
degrees under dual degree scheme. BITS C413 has been cre-
ated as a required course if a dual degree student is permitted a
Practice School option for a second degree after he has com-
pleted Thesis option for one degree.
BITS F414 Introduction to Bioinformatics 3 0 3
Introduction to genomics and proteomics, Human genome and
other sequencing projects; Biological database and data mining;
Similarity search and sequence alignment; Protein structure
prediction and structure analysis; Use of software package in
bioinformatics.
BITS F415 Introduction to MEMS 3 1 4
Overview, history and industry perspective; working principles;
mechanics and dynamics, thermofluid engineering; scaling law;
microactuators, microsensors and microelectromechanical sys-
tems; microsystem design, modeling and simulation; materials;
packaging; microfabrication: bulk, surface, LIGA etc; microman-
ufacturing; microfludidics; microrobotics; case studies.
BITS F416 Introduction to Nanoscience 3 0 3
Introduction; nanoscience in nature; fundamental science be-
hind nanomaterials; synthesis and properties of nanomaterials;
tools to study the properties, size and shape determinations,
application of nanomaterials in science, engineering and bio-
medical field; future trends.
BITS F417 Microfluidics and Its Application 4*
Introduction to microfluidics, scaling in microfluidics, theoretical
microfluidics, Philosophy of Computational Fluid Dynamics,
Concepts of discretization, fabrication techniques for microfluid-
ic devices, microvalves, micropumps, microflow sensors, micro-
fluidics for life sciences: micromixers, microneedles, microfilters,
microseparators, microreactors, modeling and simulation on
CAD tool.
BITS F418 Introduction to Biomedical Engineering 3 1 4
Introduction; Engineering principals applied for physiological
phenomena; Bio implant materials:Metallic, ceramics; Polymeric
materials for bio applications; Protein-biomaterial surface Inter-
actions;Modification of surface of the biomaterials; Tissue engi-
neering;Drug delivery systems, principals,and applications; Bi-
omedical sensors; Modeling and simulation.
BITS F419 Management of Cross-cultural Engineer- 3 0 3
ing Teams
Characteristics of open technological innovation in competitive
global market. The dynamic interaction between technological
innovation and market competition – the S-curves. Standard
battles to shape the dominant design of a new technology –
Cross-the-Chasm and timing of entry. Competitive strategy of
companies in different market segments – the Segment-Zero
Principle.Commoditization of technology and product on global
market – out-sourcing and off-shoring. Blueocean strategy to
innovate new breakthrough products.
BITS F421T Thesis 16
BITS F422T Thesis 16
The above two courses will be operated identically with stipulat-
I-11
ed prior preparation conditions as per the Academic Regula-
tions. BITS F421 is a required course for all students with The-
sis option either for a single degree or for one of the degrees
under dual degree scheme. BITS F421 and BITS F422 have
been created as required courses if a dual degree student is
permitted Thesis option for a second degree after he has com-
pleted Thesis option for one degree.
BITS F423T Thesis 9
BITS F424T Thesis 9
Course description of the above two courses is same as given
under BITS F421T/BITS F422T. However Thesis with this
course number will be available with concurrent coursework for
at most 9 Units over a full semester duration.
BITS F427 Digital Marketing 3 0 3
Fundamentals of e-Business and Internet Marketing, e-
Business Models and Frameworks, Digital Marketing Strategy,
Online Public Relations, Search Engine Optimization and Mar-
keting, Content Marketing, E-Mail Marketing, Social Media Mar-
keting, Mobile Marketing, Optimizing Customer and User Expe-
rience, Web Analytics.
BITS F428 Essentials of Strategic Management 3 0 3
Difference between Strategy and Organizational effectiveness;
Tools for internal and external strategic analyses; Environmen-
tal Scanning and Industry Analysis; Market opportunities and in-
ternal sources of competitive advantage; Value chain analysis;
Corporate level, Business level and Functional strategies; Strat-
egy implementation.
BITS F429 Nanotechnology for Renewable Energy 3 1 4
and Environment
Basics of nano physics, macro vs. nano. Solar cells: Organic
solar cell, quantum dot solar cell, dye sensitized solar cell. Self
cleaning in solar panel. Fuel cell: Nano electrode and catalysts.
Batteries: Nano electrode based batteries. Catalysts: H2 pro-
duction and H2 storage. Carbon nano tube for energy. wind en-
ergy: Nanocomposites, nanocoating, and nanolubricants. Nano-
technology as tool for sustainability. Environmental fate &
transport of nanomaterials. Nanomaterials for ground water re-
mediation. Nanomaterials as adsorbents. Toxicity of nano-
materials, Ecotoxicological impacts of nanomaterials, Societal
implications of nanotechnology.
Pre-requisites
BITS F201: Material Science and Engineering (Pre-requisite)
OR CHEM F333: Chemistry of Materials (Pre-requisite) OR
PHY F414: Physics of Advanced Materials (Pre-requisite) OR
CHE F243: Material Science and Engineering (Pre-requisite)
OR ME F213: Materials Science and Engineering (Pre-
requisite) OR MF F213: Materials Science and Engineering
(Pre-requisite).
BITS F430 Renewable Energy Laboratory 0 2 2
Experiments on generation of photovoltaic power, wind energy,
geothermal energy, fuel cell energy, piezoelectric energy har-
vesting, smart grid, micro grid, etc.
BITS F431 Flexible Manufacturing Systems 3 2 4
Introduction CAD/CAM systems, overview of FMS, system
hardware and general functions, material handling system, work
holding systems, cutting tools and tool management, physical
planning of system, software structure functions and descrip-
tion, cleaning and automated inspection, communications and
computer networks for manufacturing, quantification of flexibility,
human factors in manufacturing, FMS and CIM in action (case
studies), justification of FMS, modelling for design, planning and
operation of FMS.
BITS F433 Supply Chain Analytics 3 1 4
Introduction to supply chain analytics, Data understanding and
data preparation, Supply chain performance , Descriptive ana-
lytics, Predictive analytics and setting up the problem, Supply
chain forecasting, studying holt, winter and ARIMA models,
Supply chain Network Planning, Multi echelon network optimiza-
tion, Supply chain sales and operations planning, Supply chain
segmentation, Vehicle routing problems, Supervised and Unsu-
VI
pervised learning, Use of Bayesian networks in supply chain,
Simulation and SC models, Supply chain risk management.
BITS F437 Technical Communication 3 0 3
Overview of technical communication, verbal and non-verbal
communication, elements of effective writing, technical report,
technical proposal, research paper, dissertation, thesis, presen-
tations and group discussions.
BITS F441 Robotics 3
The objective of this course is to make the students familiar with
Robotics, the main components of kinematics, sensors, trans-
mission and drives, control systems, intelligence and vision, ge-
ometric modelling and reasoning, assembly planning, grasping,
collision avoidance, mobile robots, force strategies, uncertainty
analysis, and representation of visual world.
BITS F442 Remote Sensing and Image Processing 3
Introduction to remote sensing; types of sensors; earth resource
sensors; Landsat; IRS; SPOT; microwave remote sensing;
SAR; SLAR; thermal infrared remote sensing; data analysis;
image processing; smoothing; filtering; image averag-
ing;enhancement techniques; transforms; FFT; PCA; segmenta-
tion; gradient operators; pattern recognition; ML classifier; min-
imum distance classifier; other classifiers; ISODATA clustering;
feature selection; divergence; canonical analysis; recent devel-
opments in remote sensing; LIDAR; imaging spectroscopy etc.
BITS F444 Artificial Intelligence 3
The object of this course is to give an introduction to the prob-
lems and techniques of A.I. along with the applications of A.I.
techniques to the fields like natural language understanding,
image processing, game theory and problem solving.
BITS F445Neural Networks and Applications 3 0 3
Introduction to neural networks and fuzzy systems’ neural dy-
namics; activations and signals; activation models; unsuper-
vised and suprvised learning rules and their domain of applica-
tions; architectures of neural systems; adaptive fuzzy and neu-
ral control systems and their comparison; case studies on fuzzy
and neural control systems.
BITS F446 Pattern Recognition 3
The object of this course is to study the principles and available
techniques for the analysis and design of pattern recognition
system, introduction to pattern classification by distance func-
tions, and likelihood functions, trainable pattern classifiers: de-
terministic and statistical approach.
BITS F447 Multimedia Computing 3 0 3
Introduction to multimedia; media & data streams; image, video
& audio file formats; image & video processing, synthesis of
sound signal; image coding & compression, video & audio co-
decs, low bit rate video telephony; audio-visual integration, lip
reading, face animation; augmented reality; multimedia search
services, content based image & video indexing; access to mul-
timedia, human-machine interfaces, spoken language interface;
algorithm vs. architecture based approaches, multimedia pro-
cessors, performance quantification; case studies, vision 2010.
BITS F448 Retail Management Systems 3 0 3
Retailing history and theories, basic retail management process,
retail industry in Indian and abroad, shopper behavior in retail-
ing, retailing formats and location related issues, category man-
agement, supply chain management in retail, retail buying, store
layout and design, point of purchase communication, retail pric-
ing strategy, building store loyalty and technology in retailing.
Case studies and projects in retailing, specially focusing on In-
dian scenarios.
BITS F449 Financial Engineering 3 0 3
Introduction; Review of Markets, Players, and Conventions;
Cash Flow Engineering with Forward Contracts; Engineering
Simple Interest Rate Derivatives; Swap Engineering; Report
Market Strategies; Dynamic Replication Methods and Synthet-
ics; Mechanics of Options; Options Engineering with Applica-
tions; Pricing Tools; Applications of Fundamental Theorem of
Finance; Fixed Income Engineering; Tools for Volatility Engi-
neering: Volatility Swaps and Volatility Trading; Engineering of
Equity Instruments: Pricing and Replication, computational
I-12
methods such as Monte Carlo Simulation.
BITS F451 Autonomous Mobile Robotics 3 0 3
Kinematics, Dynamics and Control of Mobile Robots, Path plan-
ning, Roadmaps, Cell decomposition, Sensors for mobile ro-
bots, Sensor fusion algorithms, Autonomous navigation algo-
rithms.
BITS F452 Blockchain Technology 3 0 3
Blockchain Technology, and its applications, Cryptocurrencies,
Distributed Ledger Technology, Decimalized Systems, Block-
chain Data Structure, Cryptography for Blockchain, Decentral-
ized Identity Management, Consensus Mechanism, Smart con-
tracts, Ethereum, Ethereum Virtual Machine, Distributed App
development, Consortium Blockchain, Hyperledger, Case stud-
ies/Enabling Technologies and applications
BITS F453 Computational Learning Theory 3 0 3
Empirical Risk Minimization, Structural Risk Minimization, PAC
learning, The Rademacher Complexity, Error Decomposition,
VC dimension, Convexity, Lipschitz Learning, Regularization
and Stability, Stochastic Learning, Subgradients
BITS F454 Bio-Inspired Intelligence: Algorithms and 3 0 3
Applications
Concepts of Nature and Social Systems; Principles of Swarm
Intelligence; Particle Swarm Optimization - Convergence, Varia-
tions and Comparisons, Applications in Engineering; Ant Colony
Optimization Algorithms, ACO for NP-Hard Problems; Bio-
inspired Models (Bat, Fish, Cuckoo, Bee, Wolf) - Algorithms,
Applications, Algorithm Analysis; Study on Search Spaces and
Test Functions
BITS F455 Analytics For Supply Chain 3*
Supply chain performance, Descriptive analytics, Supply chain
forecasting, studying holt, winter and ARIMA models, Supply
chain segmentation. Single period and multi-period inventory
modeling, Multi-echelon inventory models, Network flow
models, Distribution planning, Sales, & Operations planning,
Vehicle routing problems, Simulation in supply chain risk
assessment.
Equivalent: MPBA G520: Analytics For Supply Chain
BITS F456 Capstone Project I 4*
This course is the first half of a research and development
(R&D) project that comprises two sequential courses (Part A
and Part B) and is the capstone for all engineering programmes
offered under BITS RMIT Academy. In this culminating academ-
ic experience student will apply their technical knowledge and
further develop their research, design and professional engi-
neering skills. The authentic project maybe industry based and
focuses on producing well-managed practical and pertinent so-
lutions to either discipline specific, or cross disciplinary engi-
neering problems, through robust research and established en-
gineering design processes. The Capstone Project I focuses on:
articulation of the project requirements, challenge, need, prob-
lem or feasibility; establishment of design criteria and con-
straints; project planning; the critical appraisal of all the relevant
published material by way of a comprehensive literature search
and review; benchmarking of all related and relevant solutions;
and hence well-informed consideration of possible solutions. Af-
ter successfully passing this course, students will undertake the
required companion course “Capstone Project II” which will re-
sult in the fulfilment of the final project deliverable.
Equivalent: OENG1167 Engineering Capstone Project Part A
offered at RMIT.
BITS F457 Capstone Project II 4*
This course includes a work integrated learning experience in
which student’s knowledge and skills will be applied and as-
sessed in a real or simulated workplace context, and where
feedback from industry and/ or community is integral to their ex-
perience. This second half of the Capstone engineering re-
search and development (R&D) project concludes a culminating
experience that applies student’s technical knowledge, re-
search, design and professional engineering skills. It maybe in-
dustry based and aims to produce a well-managed practical and
pertinent solution to either discipline specific, or cross discipli-
nary engineering problems, through robust research and estab-
VI
lished engineering design processes. This second part of the
project (Part B) focuses on: Summarising the outcomes from
student’s ‘Capstone Project I’; Clearly articulating a plan, includ-
ing milestones and responsibilities; The application of a method-
ical design process for the systemic optimisation and embodi-
ment of an engineered solution; The manufacture of a tangible
deliverable (wherever appropriate); The test and verification of
the solution; and a comprehensive suite of relevant project doc-
umentation.
Prerequisite: BITS F456 Capstone Project I
Equivalent: OENG1168 Engineering Capstone Project Part B
offered at RMIT.
BITS F461 Software Engineering 3
Software engineering concepts and methodology; formal re-
quirements specification; estimation; software project planning;
detailed design; techniques of design; productivity; documenta-
tion; programming languages styles, code review; tool, integra-
tion and validation; software quality assurance; software
maintenance; metrics, automated tools in software engineering.
BITS F462 Renewable Energy 3 0 3
Introduction of renewable energy, advantages, potential, status
of development, broad details of different renewable energy
systems such as solar, wind, biomass, microhydel, geothermal
etc; Renewable energy development policy, Renewable energy
industries, international co-operation, HRD and career growth
opportunities, consultancy areas and future thrust areas in re-
newable energy development.
BITS F463 Cryptography 3 0 3
Objectives of cryptography; ciphers – block and stream; math-
ematical foundations – modular arithmetic, finite fields, discrete
logarithm, primality algorithms; RSA; digital signatures; interac-
tive proofs; zero–knowledge proofs; probabilistic algorithms;
pseudo-randomness.
BITS F464 Machine Learning 3 0 3
Neural networks; neuro-computing theory and applications,
knowledge representation; computational learning theory; statis-
tical/probabilistic methods, genetic algorithms; in duc-
tive/analytic/reinforcement learning and bayesian networks; se-
lected topics such as alpha-beta pruning in game trees, com-
puter models of mathematical reasoning, natural language un-
derstanding and philosophical implications.
BITS F465 Enterprise Computing 3 1 4
Overview of enterprise applications and their architecture-
Building distributed multi tier applications using enterprise java–
Packaging and deploying enterprise applications into application
servers- Development of web applications using java servlets -
java server pages and java server faces - Usage of JDBC for
database driven enterprise applications -Enterprise java support
for building soap and Rest enabled web services-Enterprise ap-
plication integration using software components -Enterprise java
beans-Message based communication between enterprise ap-
plication components using JMS-Need for handling data persis-
tence in database driven applications in an object-oriented
manner –Usage of java persistence API for handling data per-
sistence-Need for security of enterprise applications-Securing
enterprise java applications using java based Glassfish applica-
tion server-Configuring glassfish server for SSL security-
Working with Realms, Users, Groups, and Role for client au-
thentication-Overview of dot net framework for building distrib-
uted enterprise applications-Dot net framework: windows
presentation foundation windows communication foundation-
asp.net and ado.net
BITS F466 Service Oriented Computing 3 1 4
Introduction to Web Services: Distributed computing using soft-
ware component technologies like DCOM and EJBs-overview
about Service Oriented Architecture- RPC and Document cen-
tric SOAP enabled web services-Describing information using
XML -SAX and DOM based XML parsers-XSLT-XPath. SOAP
Protocol for web services- Describing Web Services using
WSDL-Publishing and Finding web services using UDDI Regis-
try-UDDI SOAP APIs-Inquiry APIs-Publisher APIs. Web Ser-
vices security –Need for secured web service-confidentiality of
I-13
web service invocation using XML encryption and its ad-
vantages over SSL security -Integrity of soap message using
xml digital signing-Maintaining confidentiality and integration to-
gether for soap messages -Authentication mechanisms for Web
service client – Security Assertion Markup Language- Incorpo-
rating saml assertions for web service client authentication- IP
layer security for web service- Need for work flow of web ser-
vices-Usage of Business Process Execution Language for de-
scribing workflow of web services-Rest web service, its protocol
and usage-Usage of Ajax in invoking Rest web service-Role
played by web services in cloud computing.
BITS F467 Bioethics and Biosafety 3 0 3
Introduction to the need and issues governing biosafety, legal,
ethical and social implications of human gene manipulation,
guidelines for research in transgenic organisms and plants, so-
cio-economic impacts of biotechnological experiments, GLP and
MGP and CPCSEA guidelines, patent processing, ethics in
stem cell research, animal cloning and organ transplants, envi-
ronmental pollution-hazards and control, public education and
participation in biosafety.
BITS F468 New Venture Creation 3 0 3
Entrepreneurship as career option, idea to opportunity – market
analysis and segmentation, presenting a pitch deck, building the
startup team, competition analysis, lean startups, product de-
velopment, intellectual property, sales and marketing, business
models, financing, launching a business, growth and exit strate-
gy, social entrepreneurship, business plan presentation skills.
BITS F469 Financing Infrastructure Projects 3 0 3
Investment decisions in infrastructural projects: benefit cost
analysis, measurement problems, indirect estimation methods
of benefits; Cost of capital: private and public money, different
schools of thought on social capital- cases; Multiple projects
and constraints: linear and integer programming models, goal
programming formulation; Financing infrastructure projects: ven-
ture capital, sources of capital–private and public participation,
modes of cooperation such as BOOT and BOT national and in-
ternational sources, international agencies, borrowing terms and
conditionalities; Public policy issues, leasing and mortgaging,
evaluation issues, infrastructural mutual funds, valuation as-
pects; Real options, value of option for delay, abandonment and
vacant land – judgmental assessment of options; post review
and administrative issues in project management, international
(cross country) projects, implementation issues.
BITS F482 Creating and Leading Entrepreneurial Or- 3 0 3
ganizations
Fundamentals of entrepreneurship; elements of leadership;
identifying business opportunities; market study and research;
business plans; finance, issues in raising finance; venture capi-
talist evaluation of business plans, technical aspects for the pro-
ject, corporate strategies for growth; legal aspect to entrepre-
neurship, people skills, marketing and branding; creativity and
communication.
BITS F488 Services Management Systems 3 0 3
Understanding Services, the Service Sector today, Designing
the Service Enterprise, Technological Issues, Structuring Ser-
vice Operations, Processes Management, Staffing for Services,
Functions of Services Management System, Client Relation-
ships, Measuring and Reporting Services.
BITS F489 Enterprise Resource Planning 3 0 3
Introduction to ERP; Re-engineering and ERP systems; ERP
planning, design, and implementation; ERP systems – sales
and marketing; ERP systems – accounting and finance; ERP
systems – production and materials management; ERP systems
– human resources; Managing and ERP project; Supply chain
management and e-Market place.
BITS F493 Business Analysis and Valuation 3 0 3
Theory of finance, value maximization, stakeholder theory, and
corporate objective function: value creation – ways and means,
business analysis: The techniques of strategy and competitive
VI
analysis, value chain analysis for competitive advantages, busi-
ness valuation – approaches and methods, the dark side of val-
uation: strategic investment decisions.
BITS F494 Environmental Impact Assessment 3 1 4
Environment and global problems; Framing Environmental is-
sues; effects of infrastructure development on environment;
prediction and assessment of environmental impacts of infra-
structure projects: technical and procedural aspects, guidelines
and legal aspects of environmental protection, impacts on air,
water, soil and noise environment, valuation, strategic assess-
ment, mathematical modeling for environmental processes; so-
cial impact assessment (SIA), dislocation/disruption impact of
Infrastructure projects; Life Cycle Assessments (LCA) and risk
analysis methodologies; mitigation of environmental impacts;
case studies; environmental management plan (EMP), national
and international certification and guidelines including ISO.
BITS G501 Biostatistics 5
Methods of collection and presentation of statistical data; calcu-
lation and interpretation of various measures like mean, median,
mode, standard deviation, kurtosis, correlation coefficient; prob-
ability distributions; sampling and estimation of parameters;
tests of hypothesis; data analysis. Introduction to data classifi-
cation, analysis and probability; statistical inference – estimation
and hypothesis testing; linear regression and correlation; design
of experiments; analysis of variance; non parametric procedures
& tests; experimental design in clinical trials and validation;
basic techniques in optimization.
BITS G511 Advanced Project 5
This course is designed to permit treatment of an advanced ar-
ea in a discipline or interdisciplinary pursuit to meet the objec-
tives of acquisition of additional competence by the student and
also development of new areas of study or lab. The course will
be characterized by minimum formal contact and maximum self-
study under immediate supervision by the teacher.
BITS G512 Object Oriented Programming 2 2 4
Basics of object oriented programming: objects, classes, in-
stances; inheritance; polymorphism; operator overloading; static
and dynamic binding; small talk, C++, cases from other object
oriented languages like Ada, Loop, Flavors, Objective-C, etc.;
object oriented software engineering.
BITS G513 Study in Advanced Topics 5
In this course students will be assigned study work in advanced
areas of professional interest. Each student will work under the
overall supervision and guidance of a faculty member and will in
the end submit a project report encompassing critical review of
the material studied.
The organisation and evaluation of the course would be
achieved through seminars, group discussions, project report
etc. The course will be conducted by the team of teachers who
provide guidance for study work.
BITS G514 Environmental Health 3 0 3
Environmental Health and its importance, water pollution, air
pollution, automobile pollution, pollution due to chemicals used
in agricultural sector, handling and disposal of domestic and in-
dustrial refuse, incineration of waste materials, techniques for
studying, monitoring and controlling pollution, effect on health,
vector control, effect of high frequency electromagnetic radia-
tion, nuclear radiation, hazardous wastes, occupational health.
BITS G515 Management Principles and Practices 4*
Management concepts and functions; Decision process; Mar-
keting variables, analysis and research; Services marketing; Fi-
nancial transactions and statements; Financial planning and
control; Manpower planning and development; Personnel ap-
praisal, General administration.
BITS G516 Introduction to Business Sustainabiligy 3 0 3
Evolution of the Concept of sustainable development, Dimensions
of sustainable development, Issues and Trends in business sus-
tainability, Business Sustainability, Sustainable Consumption and
Production, Industrial Environment Management, Finance of sus-
tainability, Setting Goals and Measuring Progress towards sus-
tainability
I-14
BITS G517 Cross Cultural Management 3 0 3
The Critical Role of Culture in Management, The Various Di-
mensions of Culture, The Impact of Culture On Management
Functions Like Communication, Negotiation, Motivation, Lead-
ership and Human Resource Management, Formulating and
Implementing Strategy for International and Global Operations,
Managing Global Teams, International Assignment and Expatri-
ate Management, Skills and Competencies for Global Manag-
ers, International Business Etiquette and Uniqueness of Indian
Culture and Management.
BITS G518 Writing Seminar 3 2 5
Understanding claims structures; multiple rhetoricalcontexts and
diverse persuasion strategies in classical,Rogerian and the
Toulminian framework; Analyzingarguments rhetorically; Ana-
lyzing visual arguments,overview of anthology of arguments, re-
evaluatingsources and presenting new operational defini-
tions;Project
BITS G521 Fourth Generation Languages and Appli- 1 3 4
cations
Nature of 4GLs; application generators; RDBMS and 4GLs;
SQL based 4GLs; 4GLs and development of information sys-
tems and decision support systems; other types of 4GLs; case
studies.
BITS G522 Software Development Standards 1 3 4
Standards and their role in software development; Institutions
involved in formulating and promoting standards; operating en-
vironment standards; POSIX; software design standards; dia-
gramming standards; coding standards; language design, code
generation and usage standards; software portability and
standards; standards in software development tools; standards
in compilers and interpreters; open systems; OSI; user interface
standards.
BITS G524 Health Economics and Policy I 5*
Introduction to health economics; utility and health; how to think
about health and health care; the production of health; health
through the life cycle; a model of consumption and health; the
demand for medical care: conceptual framework; empirical stud-
ies of medical care demand and applications; the physician and
the physician-firm; physicians in the marketplace; the hospital
as a supplier of medical care; hospitals in the marketplace; the
demand for health insurance; government provision of health
insurance; externalities in health and medical care; managing
the market: regulation, quality certification, and technical
change; universal insurance issues and international compari-
sons of health care systems
BITS G525 Health Economics and Policy II 5*
Health care provision; health in low and middle income coun-
tries; health system issues in low and middle income countries;
introduction to economic evaluation; making decisions in health
care; measuring and valuing effects: health gain; measuring and
valuing effects: consumption benefits of health care; cost analy-
sis; using clinical studies as vehicles for economic evaluation;
economic evaluation using decision-analytic modelling; charac-
terizing, reporting, and interpreting uncertainty; ethical and so-
cial implications of economic evaluations of health policies
BITS G526 Data Sciences I 5*
Different types of data, methods for data collection, organizing,
summarizing, and interpretation of data, introducing descriptive
statistics (measures of central centenaries, measures of varia-
tion), introducing random variables, probability distributions, dis-
crete and continuous probability distributions, sampling, sam-
pling distributions, theory of estimation, estimation of parame-
ters (point and interval estimates), tests of hypothesis, types of
errors, determinations of sample size for a study, tests of hy-
pothesis using parametric (t-test, ANOVA) and various nonpar-
ametric tests, understand the correlations and regression analy-
sis. An introduction to epidemiologic studies and survival analy-
sis.
BITS G529 Research Project I 6
BITS G539 Research Project II 6
This is a package of two courses dealing with an advanced pur-
VI
suit in terms of a study project or a lab project in assigned areas
of professional interest. Each student will work under the overall
supervision and guidance of an assigned teacher. The second
course may be a continuation of the task engaged in the first
course; or the two courses may be independent of each other.
Each course must end with a well-defined project report outlin-
ing all the investigative efforts and conclusions.
BITS G540 Research Practice 4*
This course is designed to train the students towards acquiring
competence in research methodologies. The course will be
conducted in terms of actual participation in Research and De-
velopment Work. Each student will be assigned to a faculty
member to work on specified projects. The student will be re-
quired to present a number of seminars in his research area in a
structured manner.
BITS G541 User Interfaces 1 3 4
Emerging importance of user interfaces; user interface man-
agement systems; designing UIMS toolkits; hardware and OS
aids in user interface development; human & psychological fac-
tors in user interface design; theories, principles and guidelines;
emerging interaction styles; menu selection systems, command
languages, direct manipulation; interaction device; hypertext;
standards in user interface design and implementation; case
studies from Domain Dialog; Apple's user interface; Open Look;
OSF/Motif.
BITS G553 Real Time Systems 3 1 4
Real time software, Real time operating systems-scheduling,
virtual memory issues and file systems, real time data bases,
fault tolerance and exception handling techniques, reliability
evaluation, data structures and algorithms for real
time/embedded systems, programming languages, compilers
and run time environment for real time/embedded systems, real
time system design, real time communication and security, real
time constraints and multi processing and distributed systems.
BITS G554 Data Compression 3 1 4
Introduction: the need for data compression. Information theory
and data compression; Entropy, Relative entropy and mutual in-
formation. Fano’s inquality. Types of information sources, and
source extension. Asymptotic equipartition property and data
compression. Entropy rates of stochastic processes. Kraft ine-
quality, Prefix codes, Huffman codes and Arithmetic coding.
Quantization and Rate distortion theory. Lossy image compres-
sion techniques based on DCT, VQ and Fractals. Introduction to
wavelets: continuous and discrete wavelet transforms. Filter
banks and wavelets. Frames and tight frames. Wavelet packets.
Wavelet based signal processing. Joint source and channel
coding.
BITS G560 Practice School 20
BITS G561T Dissertation 25 (Max)
BITS G565T Dissertation 5
BITS G612 Methods and Techniques of Systems En- 2 3 5
gineering
This course would cover various systems engineering methods
and techniques in the context of their application to the design,
implementation and operation of large, humanly-contrived soft
systems. The techniques would be chosen from amongst linear
programming, integer programming, queuing theory, inventory
control, simulation, maintenance models sampling techniques,
forecasting techniques, decision models, network scheduling
methods etc. These would be applied in the context of resource
planning, facility location, manpower planning, financial man-
agement, decision-making, maintenance issues, construction
and operation scheduling; planning research issues; social as-
sessment of technology; issues of technology-economy nexus
etc.
BITS G613 Systems Analysis for Large Systems 2 3 5
System thinking and approach; concepts of systems with special
reference to large, humanly-contrived soft systems; review of
mathematical techniques and principles of economics and man-
agement required for systems engineering of such systems; mod-
elling and systems engineering methodology for large soft sys-
tems.
I-15
BITS G619 Professional Practice 4
This course will aim to achieve a professional development of
the student in the context of the overall goal of his/her pro-
gramme. Depending upon the profession, this course will be
conducted in terms of actual participation in professional activi-
ties such as teaching, laboratory organization, course develop-
ment, organizational development, R&D work, design, produc-
tion, data organization, data preparation or management of in-
stitutions/ hospitals/voluntary organizations, etc. The course will
also deal with communication aspects such as teaching a
course, presenting a paper in the seminar/conference, articulat-
ing ideas and concepts to professional audience/customers, etc.
This course will also deal with the laws and ethics concerned
with the profession of an individual.
BITS G620 Professional Practice I 3
BITS G621 Professional Practice II 3
These two courses, to be offered in two consecutive semesters,
are designed to train the students towards acquiring compe-
tence in teaching as well as in research methodologies. The
course will be conducted in terms of actual participation in pro-
fessional activities such as teaching, laboratory organization,
course development, R & D work, etc. Each student will be as-
signed under a faculty member to work on specified projects,
and to assist the faculty in teaching and research activities. The
student will be required to present a number of seminars in a
group in a structured manner.
BITS G624 Computer Based Simulation and Model- 2 3 5
ling
Discrete event simulation on computers; Systems simulation &
simulation languages; GASP & GPSS; Continuous simulation -
languages and modelling techniques; Forrester's models; case
studies.
BITS G629T Dissertation 25 (Max)
This is a required component for all higher degree students ex-
cept for those who opt and are selected for practice school pro-
gramme. The unit requirements will vary from 12 to 25 units. It
may be registered for one full semester (12 to 25 units) after
completing all courses or may be registered for varied units (4
to 10 units) along with other courses.
BITS G630T Dissertation 25 (Max)
This is a required component for all higher degree students ex-
cept for those who opt and are selected for practice school pro-
gramme. The unit requirements will vary from 12 to 25 units. It
may be registered for one full semester (12 to 25 units) after
completing all courses or may be registered for varied units (4
to 10 units) along with other courses.
BITS G639 Practice School 20
A higher degree student if permitted can register in this course
in lieu of Dissertation only after the completion of all course
work. Concurrent registration of other courses with this course
is not permitted. All clauses of Academic Regulations applicable
to First Degree Practice School courses will govern the opera-
tion of this course.
BITS G640 Practice School 20
A higher degree student if permitted can register in this course
in lieu of Dissertation only after the completion of all course
work. Concurrent registration of other courses with this course
is not permitted. All clauses of Academic Regulations applicable
to First Degree Practice School courses will govern the opera-
tion of this course.
BITS G641 Management Information and Decision 2 3 5
Support Systems
Data & information; characteristics of information; components
of management information systems; information flows; design
and maintenance of management information systems; decision
support systems.
BITS G644 Development and Use of Computer Soft- 5
ware
Concepts and operations of processors; concept, capabilities
and types of software; review and case studies of computer ap-
VI
plications. Principles and use of standard software packages.
Principles of software creation: processing concepts, flowchart-
ing and algorithms, programming constructs, programming lan-
guages, program development sequence. Concepts of data and
information: files and databases, logical data storage structures.
Information Systems: need, significance, concepts, their Analy-
sis, Design and Implementation. Software Engineering: software
life cycle, with special reference to software planning, software
requirements and software maintenance. The course would
terminate with a term paper on a specialised area of the devel-
opment and use of computer software.
BITS G649 Reading Course 5
BITS G651 Project Formulation and Preparation 2 3 5
This course is designed to inculcate principles of technical doc-
umentation as required within S&T organizations. Through this
course, students are expected to acquire familiarity with several
of the following: Proposals, feasibility reports, formal project re-
ports, short reports, memos, negotiations, contracts, etc. In the
process principles of project formulation and evaluation, such as
technical considerations; performance specifications; prelimi-
nary block diagrams, types and analysis of contracts; cost esti-
mation concepts, work breakdown structure; project data prepa-
ration, scheduling facilities etc., would be introduced. The
course would invariably include the preparation of a detailed re-
port embodying as many of the above concepts as appropriate.
BITS G654 Advanced Instrumentation Tecniques 5
Generalized approach to measuring systems; performance
characteristics of instruments; primary sensing elements and
transducers; analog and digital signal conditioning operations;
microprocessors in instrumentation; applied process control in-
strumentation; General purpose and analytical instruments cov-
ering spectroscopic, separation, atomic absorption instruments
UV-VIS-IR,GLC, HPLC, etc; Instrumentation practices in typical
R&D laboratories; instrumentation case studies covering selec-
tion, quality assurance, system design, etc; Hands on experi-
ence in operation of sophisticated instrumentation systems.
BITS G659 Technical Communication 3 1 4
Role and importance of communication; effectiveness in oral
and written communication; technical reports; technical pro-
posals; technical descriptions; definitions and classifications;
business correspondence; précis writing; memorandum; notic-
es, agenda and minutes; oral communication related to meet-
ings, seminars, conferences, group discussions, etc.; use of
modern communication aids.
BITS N101T Physical Fitness, Health and Wellness 1
Basic Exercise - warm-up and warm-down exercise, Calisthen-
ics and its importance, Cardio-respiratory or endurance exercis-
es - various forms of endurance exercise, exercise with intensity
and duration for physical wellness; strength training exercise;
various strength exercises and their importance, free hand
weight training; flexibility exercise and wellness and relaxation
exercise including stretching & yoga. This course can be taken
only on audit.
BITS N301T Personality Integration Leadership Orien- 3*
tation and Teamwork
Concept of personality and its role in personal and career
growth : self-assessment of strengths and weakness, visioning
and goal setting, development of action plans for personal
growth; Effective communication, collaboration and conflict
management: understanding the process and importance of
communication and feedback, assessment of individual conflict
management styles, importance of nonverbal communication,
creating effective presentations and resume; Leadership and
emotional intelligence: understanding individual leadership
style, understanding the needs of followers, leveraging the
power of EI for relationship building and leading; Team work
and networking: building effective teams, decision making and
leadership in teams, developing effective networks.
(This course will be offered as an Audit Type course for both
First-Degree & Higher-Degree Students)
Civil Engineering
CE F211 Mechanics of Solids 3 0 3
I-16
Introduction to mechanics of rigid bodies and deformable bod-
ies, Thermal stresses, Equilibrium of forces, Bending moment
and shear force diagrams for determinate beams and frames,
Analysis of statically determinate trusses; Flexural and shear
Stresses in beams, Combined stresses, Stresses and strains on
inclined planes, Introduction to torsion, Torsion in shafts, Slope
and deflection in beams due to bending, Introduction to Energy
Methods, Stresses in thin cylindrical shells, Suspension cables,
Failure theories, Buckling of columns using Euler’s Theory.
CE F212 Transport Phenomena 3 0 3
Concepts and definitions, Fluid pressure and measurement,
Hydrostatics, Buoyancy, Fundamentals of fluid flow and Kine-
matics of Fluid in Motion, Flow Analysis using Control Volume
Approach and its applications in conservation of mass, momen-
tum and energy, Analysis of flow through pipes, Differential
forms of the fundamental laws, Viscous fluid flow Analysis, Na-
vier-Stokes Equations, Study of Flow pattern through Orifices
and Mouthpieces, Notches and Weirs and Dimensional analysis
and similitude.
CE F213 Surveying 3 1 4
Overview of Traditional Surveying Techniques like Chain sur-
veying, Compass surveying and Plane Table Surveying, Trav-
erse Computations and Adjustments, Levelling, Contouring,
Curve Setting: Different methods of setting Simple Circular
Curve, Compound Curve, Reverse Curve, Trigonometric Level-
ling, Tachometric Surveying, Surveying with GPS / DGPS and
Total Stations and Electronic Distance Measurement, Introduc-
tion to aerial photogrammetry.
CE F214 Construction Materials 3 0 3
Different types of cements, chemical composition, properties
and tests, coarse and fine aggregate for concrete, tests on ag-
gregates, grading of aggregates and its effect on concrete
properties, chemical and mineral admixtures, properties and
tests on fresh and hardened concrete; transportation and plac-
ing of concrete, nondestructive testing of concrete, durability of
concrete, quality control and acceptance criteria of concrete,
Factors in the choice of mix proportions, Proportioning of con-
crete mixes by various methods – BIS method of mix design.;
Special Concretes such as fibre reinforced concrete, high per-
formance concrete, self consolidating concrete etc., Manufactur-
ing/ sources, classification, applications, properties and testing
of bricks, blocks, tiles, stones, aggregates, puzzolanas, flyash,
lime, wood, timber, paints, tar, bitumen, cutback, emulsion,
modified bitumen, steel, non-ferrous metals, polymeric material,
geosynthetics, etc. Low cost and waste material in construction.
Latest, BIS, IRC & ASTM specifications and guidelines of all
above mentioned material, Construction equipments, classifica-
tion, selection and economics.
CE F230 Civil Engineering Materials 3 2 4
Different types of cements, chemical composition, properties
and tests, coarse and fine aggregate for concrete, tests on ag-
gregates, grading of aggregates and its effect on concrete
properties, chemical and mineral admixtures, properties and
tests on fresh and hardened concrete; transportation and plac-
ing of concrete, non-destructive testing of concrete, durability of
concrete, quality control and acceptance criteria of concrete,
Factors in the choice of mix proportions, Proportioning of con-
crete mixes by various methods – BIS method of mix design; In-
troduction to special concretes. Manufacturing/sources, classifi-
cation, applications, properties and testing of bricks, blocks,
tiles, aggregates, lime, timber, paints, glass, bitumen, cutback,
emulsion, modified bitumen, steel, non-ferrous metals, polymer-
ic materials, geo-synthetics, etc. Low cost and waste material in
construction. Latest, BIS, IRC & ASTM specifications and guide-
lines of all above mentioned material, and construction equip-
ment.
CE F231 Fluid Mechanics 3 0 3
Concepts and definitions; compressibility of fluids, Fluid pres-
sure and measurement, Fluid statics, Buoyancy, Rigid body mo-
tion, Fluid Kinematics, Conservation laws: Control Volume ap-
proach, Differential analysis of fluid flow, Study of flow pattern
through Orifices and mouthpieces, Notches and weirs, Analysis
of flow through pipes, Viscous fluid flow analysis: Analysis of
VI
flow through pipes, Dimensional analysis and similitude.
CE F241 Analysis of Structures 3 0 3
Static and kinematic Indeterminacy, Energy principles; Force
Methods of analysis: strain energy method, consistent defor-
mation method, Displacement Methods of analysis: Slope-
deflection method, Moment distribution method; Introduction to
Matrix Methods of structural analysis: Flexibility and Stiffness
Methods, Influence Line Diagrams; Analysis of Moving/Rolling
loads (for determinate structures), Introduction to approximate
analysis of frames and trusses, Analysis of Three-hinged, two-
hinged and fixed Arches, Analysis of indeterminate trusses. Ex-
posure to relevant software.
CE F242 Construction Planning and Technology 3 0 3
Principal components of a building system and their interrela-
tionships, functional planning and requirements of a building
and its components using relevant codes, building processes,
types and construction of foundation systems, masonry, walls,
floors, roofs, vertical transportation, doors, windows, building
finishes, plumbing services, damp proofing, temporary support-
ing structures; introduction to planning and scheduling of pro-
jects, construction project network analysis, Introduction to
quantity estimation, costing and valuation, contracts, tenders,
engineering economy and cost benefit analysis of a project, in-
troduction to building information modeling, computer applica-
tions in construction management. Exposure to relevant soft-
ware.
CE F243 Soil Mechanics 3 1 4
Introduction, Origin and classification of soils, index properties
of soil, Compaction characteristics of different soils, lab and field
compaction, quality control, Effective stress principle, capillarity,
Darcy’s law, permeability, Seepage through soils: piping, quick-
sand condition, flow nets, flow through dams, filters, Stress in
soils due to applied loads, Boussinesq equatin, Newmark’s In-
fluence Chart, Approximate Method, Compressibility and con-
solidation characteristics, Consolidation Settlement, Shear
Strength and Mohr-Coulomb strength criterion, direct, UCS and
triaxial shear tests, strength of loose and dense sands, pore
pressures, Skempton’s coefficients. Site investigations, meth-
ods of drilling, sampling, in situ test - SPT, CPT, plate load and
geophysical tests, immediate settlement based on elastic theo-
ries and in-situ tests. Exposure to relevant software.
CE F244 Highway Engineering 3 1 4
Overview of basic characteristics of Transportation systems,
social factors and strategic consideration, Road development
plans, Highway development projects in India, Road Develop-
ment organizations, Stages in highway alignment and Detailed
project Report preparation, Introduction to transportation plan-
ning, Geometric design Standards: Cross section elements,
sight distances, horizontal and vertical alignments, Pavement
Material Characterization: Aggregate testing and blending, Bi-
tumen and Bituminous Concrete testing and mixture design pro-
tocols, introduction to Superpave Mixture Design protocols, IRC
methods for the design of flexible and rigid highway pavements,
Overview of different stages in flexible and rigid highway con-
struction, Overview of Highway Evaluations and Maintenance,
Traffic Engineering: Traffic Characteristics, Highway capacity
and level of service concepts, Traffic measurement and analy-
sis, Traffic signals, parking studies and analysis, traffic acci-
dents, Introduction to Intelligent Transportation Systems. Expo-
sure to relevant software.
CE F266 Study Project 3
These courses include projects which are oriented towards
readings from published literature or books about new frontiers
of development or analysis of available database. These cours-
es are normally available to students in second or higher levels.
These courses must coterminate with project reports.
CE F311 Design of Concrete Structures 3 1 4
Engineering properties of different concreting materials; Design
Philosophies; Concepts of Limit State Method; Limit State De-
sign for flexure of Singly and doubly reinforced rectangular and
flanged section beams, one-way and two-way slabs; Design for
Bond, anchorage and development length; Design of beams
with rectangular and Flanged sections for Shear; Limit state of
I-17
serviceability for beams and slabs; Limit State Design for col-
lapse of columns subjected to axial, axial plus uni-axial bending
and axial and bi-axial bending; Design of Footings; Design of
Stair Cases.
CE F312 Hydraulics Engineering 3 1 4
Behaviour of real fluids: boundary layer theory, turbulent flow
through conduits; analysis of closed-conduit hydraulic systems
including pipes, valves, fittings, and pumps, water hammer in
pipes, pipe networks analysis: Hardy cross method and linear
graph method; Open channel hydraulics: uniform and non-
uniform flow; flow past immersed bodies: drag and lift; Analysis
of Impact of jets; Introduction to fluid machinery.
CE F313 Foundation Engineering 3 0 3
Earth Pressure theories, Retaining structures, design and
checks for stability, General requirement for satisfactory perfor-
mance of shallow foundations, general, local and punching
shear failures, bearing capacity, settlement, tilt and rotation of
foundations, proportioning of Shallow Foundations, footings on
layered soils and slopes, Deep foundations, capacity of single
and group Piles, laterally loaded pile, Stability of slopes, Intro-
duction to Ground Improvement Techniques and geosynthetics
with applications, Introduction to machine foundations for differ-
ent type of machines, Introduction to geotechnical earthquake
engineering and liquefaction of soils, computer applications in
foundation design.
CE F320 Design of Reinforced Concrete Structures 3 0 3
Design Philosophies: Concepts of working stress in comparison
with limit state method; Limit state design for flexure of Singly
and doubly reinforced rectangular and flanged section beams;
one-way and two-way slabs; Design for bond, anchorage and
development length; Design of beams for shear; Limit state of
serviceability for beams and slabs; Limit state design for col-
lapse of columns subjected to axial, uni-axial and bi-axial bend-
ing; Design of simple footings; Design of simple stair cases.
CE F321 Engineering Hydrology 3 0 3
Introduction to hydrometeorology; Precipitation measurement
and analysis; Hydrologic abstractions; Stream flow measure-
ment; Runoff and hydrographs; Floods; flood routing; Ground
water hydrology; Sediment transport; Introduction to irrigation
engineering, Introduction to dams, spillways, diversion head-
works and distribution systems.
CE F323 Introduction to Environmental Engineering 3 0 3
Introduction to environmental systems; Material (conservative
and non-conservative systems) and energy balances; Risk As-
sessment; Water pollution and management; Air pollution and
management; Essentials of Solid waste management; environ-
mental noise pollution and its control; radioactive waste man-
agement; Modelling of Environmental systems; Introduction to
Environmental impact assessment ; Legislations
CE F324 Numerical Analysis 3 0 3
Solution of Linear Algebraic System of Equations, Storage
Schemes and techniques to a System of Large number of
Equation, Numerical Solutions by Interpolation, Integration of
Functions containing Singularities, Finite Element Method, Solu-
tions of Initial and Boundary Value Problems, Boundary Integral
Element Method, Solution of Non Linear System of Equations.
CE F325 Fundamentals of Rock Mechanics 3 0 3
Internal structure of Earth; Types of rocks andgeological fea-
tures; Intact rock and rock mass; Shearstrength; Rock mass
classification systems; Rock slopefailure mechanisms; Conver-
gence ConfinementMethod, Ground and Support Reaction
Curves,Longitudinal Deformation Profile, Construction ofMetro
Tunnels, Cut and Cover Method, Tunnel BoringMachine;
Stresses in rocks, Rock burst, Squeezingground conditions;
Methods for improvement of rockmass response.
CE F326 Impact of Climate Change on Water 2 1 3
Introduction to hydrology, climate change, Overview of global
climate models (GCM) and Regional Climate Models (RCMs),
performance indicators, weights estimation, ranking of GCMs,
Ensembling of GCMs; Importance of downscaling, bias correc-
tion of data; Role of cluster analysis, fuzzy cluster analysis, Ko-
honen Neural Networks in the classification of GCMs; Role of
VI
Hydrological models; Effect of climate change on the water in-
cluding urban floods, health and its impacts on society etc.; mit-
igation and adaptation strategies; Case studies for demonstrat-
ing the replicating ability of the employed techniques, limita-
tions, and challenges
CE F341 Hydrology & Water Resources Engineering 3 0 3
Hydrological Cycle and Budget; Precipitation Measurement and
Analysis; Hydrologic Abstractions; Stream Flow analysis and
concepts of hydrograph; Hydrologic measurements; Statistical
analysis in hydrology; Ground Water hydrology; Flood Routing;
Water withdrawals and uses, Introduction to dams, spillways,
diversion head-works and distribution systems, River basin
management, Reservoir planning and multi-purpose reservoirs,
hydropower engineering, Systems analysis techniques in plan-
ning and practical applications.
CE F342 Water & Waste Water Treatment 3 1 4
Water supply and waste water systems; capacity requirements;
analysis of water and waste water; treatment requirements; unit
operations and processes of treatment, design of treatment
units; disposal of waste water and sludge; design of sewers and
water distribution networks; rural sanitation; effluent re-
purification and reuse.
CE F343 Design of Steel Structures 3 0 3
Introduction to Limit State Design and Plastic design, Limit state
design of bolted and welded connections, Eccentric connection,
Design of Tension Members, Design of Compression Members,
Design of Beams, Design of plate girders, Column bases. Ex-
posure to relevant software.
CE F345 Computational Geomechanics 3 3 0 3
General Theory of Elasticity; Analysis of Stress and Strain,
Spherical and Deviatoric Stress Tensors, General state of
stress in three-dimensions in cylindrical coordinate system,
Three-dimensional Mohr’s stress Circle, Strain Transformation,
Octahedral Strains, Mohr's Circle for Strain, Equations of Com-
patibility for Strain; Pore pressure and stress-strain response of
soil due to undrained loading, Volume Change Behaviour, Peak
State and Dilatancy, Rowe’s Dilatancy Theory; Critical State Pa-
rameters, Failure line in p΄-q space and e-p΄ space, Soil Yield-
ing, Strain Hardening and Strain Softening; Introduction to fail-
ure theories of soils, their relative merits and demerits and ap-
plicability for different types of soil; Computer Applications; Suit-
ability of the failure models in real-time geotechnical problems.
CE F366 Lab Project 3
CE F367 Lab Project 3
These courses include projects involving laboratory investiga-
tion or laboratory development in the students discipline or in-
terdisciplinary areas. These courses are normally available to
students in third or higher levels. These courses must cotermi-
nate with project reports.
CE F376 Design Project 3
CE F377 Design Project 3
These courses are intended to impart training in design of prod-
uct/ process or other artifact to the students in the discipline or
interdisciplinary areas. These courses are normally available to
students in third or higher levels. These courses must cotermi-
nate with project reports.
CE F411 Operation Research for Engineers 3 0 3
Linear programming, Simplex method, Duality and sensitivity
analysis, Transportation model and its variants, Integer linear
programming, Nonlinear programming, Introduction to Multi-
objective optimization and case study, Game theory, Evolution-
ary computation, Inventory models, Queuing system, Decision
making under certainty, risk, and uncertainty.
CE F412 Disaster Management 3 0 3
Definitions, types of hazards, natural and man-made disasters,
impact, causes and effects, damages, coping mechanism and
relief assistance, disaster continuum, preparedness, prevention,
mitigation, warning and management, vulnerability assessment,
rehabilitation and reconstruction after disasters, pre disaster
planning for earthquakes, cyclones, floods, draught and famine,
disaster resistant constructions, non-structural and structural
I-18
mitigation measures, guiding principles of mitigation, education
and training for disasters, disaster case studies, computer use
in disaster scenario development.
CE F413 Advanced Structural Design 3 0 3
Design of concrete chimneys, water tanks, retaining walls, bunkers
and silos, Design of steel tanks, towers, Roof trusses and Gantry
Girder design, Design of plate girders, Design of Beam-Columns.
CE F414 Introduction to Environmental Engineering 3 0 3
Environmental pollution; essentials of solid waste management;
environmental noise pollution and its control; water quality sig-
nificance; air quality management; industrial site selection crite-
ria environmental impact assessment-case studies-computer
applications.
CE F415 Design of Prestressed Concrete Structure 3 0 3
Introduction to basic concepts of prestressing; load balancing
technique prestressing systems; analysis of prestress; losses in
prestress; deflection; design of anchorage zone, design of pre-
stressed concrete girders.
CE F416 Computer Applications in Civil Engineering 3 1 4
The basics and use of recent Civil Engineering Software related
to Hydraulics, Structures, Transportation, Geo-technology and
Construction Planning and Management etc., Practical assign-
ments on industry related problems using the above software.
CE F417 Applications of Artificial Intelligence in Civil 3 0 3
Engineering
Introduction to Artificial Intelligence and soft computing; Neural
networks: Introduction, models, and its application in civil engi-
neering, fuzzy logic and its application in decision making, Clus-
tering; Genetic algorithms; Expert systems; Introduction to ma-
chine learning (Support Vector Machine), case studies.
CE F419 Geotechnical Earthquake Engineering and 3 0 3
Machine Foundation
Seismic hazard, Engineering seismology, Wave propagation,
Dynamic Soil Properties, Dynamic bearing capacity, Seismic
design of foundation, Seismic slope stability, Dynamic earth
pressure, Seismic design of retaining structure, Liquefaction,
Design of machine foundation, Soil improvement techniques,
Seismic design codes.
CE F420 Introduction to Bridge Engineering 3 0 3
Investigations for bridges, types of bridges and loading stand-
ards, selection of bridge type, analysis of culverts and girder
bridges, pier and abutments, different types of bridge founda-
tions.
CE F421 Analysis and Design of FRP Reinforced 3 0 3
Concrete Structures
Course description is to be developed.
CE F422 Urban Hydrology 2 1 3
Urban hydrology, Hydrological and planning models, Urban
flooding: Planning, forecasting and mitigation strategies, Gen-
eral circulation models and downscaling approaches, Manage-
ment of Syphonic rainwater systems and detention facilities,
sustainable urban drainage systems, Impact of anthropogenic
activities, case studies.
CE F423 Green Buildings and Energy Conservation 3 0 3
Climate zones and sun path diagram, thermal comfort, heat flow
through building materials, energy efficient building design fac-
tors like site planning, plan form and orientation, construction
techniques, materials and finishes, natural day lighting and ven-
tilation strategies, thermal performance of building elements, Ef-
ficient water management in buildings, Green building rating
system, Vernacular architecture and its use in contemporary
design, Case studies of contemporary green buildings.
CE F425 Airport, Railways and Waterways 3 0 3
Airports: Characteristics of aircrafts related to airport design;
runway orientation, length, capacity, configuration and number,
taxiway layout, high-speed exit taxiway, terminal building func-
tional areas, visual aids; grading and drainage; Railways: com-
ponent of railway tracks, train resistance and tractive power,
VI
curves and super elevation, switches and crossing, signalling
and interlocking, high speed tracks, track stresses. Tunnelling:
necessity of tunnels, ventilation, lighting and drainage; Water
transportation: nature of water transportation, classes of har-
bours, desirable features of harbour site, planning and design of
port faculties; Pipeline transportation systems: need and plan-
y ning.
CE F426 Geosynthetics and Reinforced Soil Structure 3 0 3
Geo-synthetics: classification, functions, applications, properties
& testing, Applications and advantages of reinforced soil struc-
ture. Principles, concepts and mechanism of reinforced soil.
Soil-reinforcement interface friction. Behaviour of Reinforced
earth walls, basis of wall design, internal and external stability
condition, Codal provisions; Seismic design consideration.
Bearing capacity improvement and design of foundations rest-
ing on reinforced soil; embankments on soft soils; Design of re-
inforced soil slopes, Indian experiences. Use of geosynthetics
for separations, drainage and filtration. Use of geosynthetics in
roads, airports and railways, India Road Congress, AASHTO
and other relevant guidelines; randomly distributed fiber rein-
forced soil. Soil nailing. Geocell, PVD, Geosynthetics in Envi-
ronmental Control: Liners for ponds and canals; covers and lin-
ers for landfills – material aspects and stability considerations;
Use of jute, coir, natural Geotextiles, waste products such as
scrap tire, LDPE and HDPE strips, as reinforcing material.
CE F427 System Modeling and Analysis 3 0 3
Systems and system’s approach, Modelling of physical system
and non-physical system, Continuous and discrete systems,
Time domain analysis, Frequency response, Steady-space
analysis.
CE F428 Earthquake Resistant Design and Construc- 3 0 3
tion
Earthquake resistant design philosophy. Ground motion charac-
terization, response spectra and design spectra. Free and
forced vibration analysis of single and multiple degree of free-
dom system. Seismic analysis and design of buildings and other
structures as per relevant codes. Seismic design of foundations
and liquefaction of soil, Earthquake resistant construction and
detailing for masonry & concrete structure as per relevant
codes.
CE F429 Design of Foundation Systems 3 0 3
Evaluation and interpretation of soil properties, dynamic proper-
ties of soil, geophysical and seismic methods, Stress in soil
mass due to applied load, various methods of settlement analy-
sis, static and dynamic bearing capacity of footings, bearing ca-
pacity of footings resting on layered soils and footing on or near
slopes, tilt, rotation and horizontal displacement of foundations
subjected to eccentric-inclined loads, foundations on rocks,
seismic design of shallow foundations, analysis of raft founda-
tions, circular and annular rafts, structural design of shallow
foundations, pile foundations load capacity and settlements,
various methods of analysis of laterally loaded Pile Founda-
tions, uplift capacity, piles subjected to dynamic loads, seismic
design of pile foundations, structural design of pile foundations,
static and dynamic earth pressure theories, stability analysis of
retaining walls, reinforced earth wall design, machine founda-
tions for reciprocating machines, impact type, rotary machines
such as turbines, turbogenerator, IS code provisions on founda-
tions, codal provisions on structural and earthquake resistant
design of foundations.
CE F430 Design of Advanced Concrete Structures 3 0 3
Design of footings and stair cases, Determination of deflection
and crack width in beams and slabs, Design of flat slabs, De-
sign of beam column joints, Design of circular Slabs, Design of
Retaining walls, Design of beams curved in plan.
CE F431 Principles of Geographical Information Sys- 3 1 4
tems
Introduction to Geographical Information Systems(GIS), Spatial
data models, Coordinate systems and geo-referencing, Map
projections, Databases and database management systems,
Spatial databases, Interpolation methods: Deterministic and
Statistical. Digital elevation models and their applications, Net-
work analysis, GNSS, Strategies for development, implementa-
I-19
tion and management of GIS, Next generation GIS, Case stud-
ies on use of GIS from various fields such as water and land re-
sources, environment, transportation; Introduction to remote
sensing & Image processing.
CE F432 Structural Dynamics 3 0 3
Free and forced vibrations, single and multi-degree systems,
continuous systems, response of various systems to different
excitations, damping; numerical evaluation of dynamic re-
sponse, frequency domain analysis, mode superposition, direct
integration for dynamic response.
CE F433 Remote Sensing and Image Processing 3 1 4
Overview, Fundamental concepts of remote sensing, Air photo
Interpretation, Multispectral, Thermal and hyper spectral Scan-
ning, Microwave remote sensing, Photographic Systems, Pho-
togrammetry, Digital Image Processing, Image File format, Pre-
Processing of Data, Enhancement techniques, Image Trans-
formations, Image classification, Spatial Filtering, Applications.
CE F434 Environmental Impact Assessment 3 0 3
Environment and global problems; Framing Environmental is-
sues; effects of infrastructure development on environment;
prediction and assessment of environmental impacts of infra-
structure projects: technical and procedural aspects, guidelines
and legal aspects of environmental protection, impacts on air,
water, soil and noise environment, valuation, strategic assess-
ment, mathematical modeling for environmental processes; so-
cial impact assessment (SIA), dislocation/disruption impact of
Infrastructure projects; Life Cycle Assessments (LCA) and risk
analysis methodologies; mitigation of environmental impacts;
case studies; environmental management plan (EMP), national
and international certification and guidelines including ISO.
CE F435 Introduction to Finite Element Methods 3 0 3
Element properties, Isoparametric formulations, analysis of
framed structures, plane stress, plane strain, and axisymmetric
problems, analysis of plate bending, FEM Software applications
in Civil Engineering, Introduction to FEM programming. Expo-
sure to relevant software.
CE F491 Special Project 3
This is an unstructured open-ended course where under the
overall supervision of an instructor-in-charge, batches of stu-
dents will be attached to different instructors. Each batch will
work on a specific time-bound project which is of basic or pe-
ripheral concern of his discipline. Each student must submit a
project report as a culmination of his endeavour and investiga-
tion. The instructor- in-charge will determine the choice of the
project and also whether or not the project report is to be sub-
mitted jointly by a group or individually by a student. The course
will aim to evaluate student's actual ability to use the fundamen-
tals of knowledge and to meet new unknown situations as
demonstrated by the students' interaction with the instructors
and instructor-in- charge and aggregated in the project report.
The instructor-in- charge may assign specific hours for formal
brain-storming sessions.
CE G511 Matrix Methods in Civil Engineering 3 2 5
Matrix techniques; basic equations of solid mechanics; varia-
tional methods; finite difference and finite element methods; ap-
plications to structural mechanics, soil and rock mechanics, fluid
mechanics, and hydraulic structures.
CE G512 Topics in Environmental Engineering 3 1 4
Collection and disposal of solid wastes; air pollution and control;
stream sanitation; rural water supply and sanitation.
CE G513 Advanced Computational Techniques 3 1 4
Interpolation, Polynomial Interpolation, Lagrange, Newton’s In-
terpolation, Numerical integration, Wilson  Method, Newmark’s
Method, Gauss and Hermitian Quadrature, Quadrature rules for
multiple integrals, Large system of linear simultaneous equa-
tions, Direct and iterative algorithms based on Gauss elimina-
tion, Gauss Seidel method and symmetric banded equations,
storage schemes – skyline, band solver, frontal solver, Chole-
sky decomposition, Non-linear system of equations, Eigen value
problems, Forward iteration, Inverse iteration, Jacobi, Given’s
method, Transformation of generalized Eigen value problem to
VI
standard form, Vector iteration method, Initial and boundary
value problems, Solution of first and second order differential
equations using Euler, modified Euler, and Runge-Kutta meth-
ods, Finite difference operators.
CE G514 Structural Optimization 3 1 4
Introduction, Engineering Optimization Problems, Optimal prob-
lem formulation, Single-variable optimization algorithms, Brack-
eting methods, Region Elimination methods, Gradient-based
methods, Multivariable optimization algorithms, Evolutionary op-
timization methods, Simplex Search method, Hooke-Jeeves
pattern search method, Powell’s conjugate direction method,
Cauchy’s method, Newton’s method, Conjugate Gradient meth-
od, Constrained Optimization algorithms, Kuhun-Tucker condi-
tions, Transformation methods, Direct search for constrained
minimization, Feasible Direction Method, Specialized algo-
rithms, Integer Programming, Geometric Programming, Nontra-
ditional optimization Algorithms, Genetic algorithms, Simulated
Annealing, Structural Optimization, Methods of optimal design
of structural elements, minimum weight design of truss mem-
bers, optimum reinforced design of R.C. C. Slabs and beams,
Optimization to the design of structures such as multi-storey
buildings, water tank, shell roofs, folded plates.
CE G515 Fundamentals of Systems Engineering 3 1 4
Linear Programming, Queuing Theory, Inventory Control, Simu-
lation, Maintenance models sampling techniques, Forecasting
techniques, Decision models, Network scheduling, application
to Resources planning, financial Management, facility location,
decision making Maintenance issues, construction & operational
issues for Civil Engg. System
CE G516 Multicriteria Analysis in Engineering 3 1 4
Introduction, Conventional optimization, Multi-objective Optimi-
zation, Fuzzy logic and its extensions, in multi-objective optimi-
zation, Multicriterion Decision Making, Deterministic analysis,
Stochastic analysis, Fuzzy analysis, Classification problems,
Hybrid approaches in Decision Making, Genetic Algorithms, Ar-
tificial Intelligence, Artifical Neural networks, Practical applica-
tions in Engineering.
CE G517 Waste Management Systems 3 1 4
Introduction, Wastewater and Solid Wastes, Collection and
Transportation, Waste Disposal Systems, Land Treatment,
Wastewater Management Methods, Wetland and Aquatic
Treatment, Landfilling, Incineration, Energy from Wastes, Recy-
cling, Composting, Reduction, Reuse and Recovery, Risk man-
agement, Case studies.
CE G518 Pavement Analysis and Design 3 1 4
Basic concepts in transportation planning, accessibility and mo-
bility, land use interaction, government role in transportation
planning. characteristics of travel and transport problems,
transportation survey and data collection: planning, design and
implementation, travel analysis zone (TAZ) development, tradi-
tional four-step modelling process, analysis of travel behaviour
and demand: studying travel behaviour, analysing urban travel
markets; innovations in transportation modelling: travel behav-
iour model, activity-based models. econometric modelling using
r-studio, modelling travel demand with CUBE. Transportation
Demand Management (TDM), Transportation System Manage-
ment (TSM), Smart City Transportation Planning: Transit-
Oriented Development (TOD), Pedestrian-Oriented Develop-
ment, liveable street planning, multimodal transportation plan-
ning, shared mobility concepts, integrated transportation man-
agement and planning. transportation & energy, climate change,
fuel choice and green mobility.
CE G520 Infrastructure Planning and Management 3 1 4
The goals and perspectives of planning; forecasting and design
of alternatives; plan testing: economic, financial and environ-
mental evaluation; the challenges of managing infrastructure;
Information management and decision support system; Con-
cepts of total quality management; Economics: life-cycle analy-
sis and maintenance, Rehabilitation and Reconstruction (M.R &
R) programming; Infrastructure management system (IMS) de-
velopment and implementation; Rural Infrastructure Planning.
CE G521 Topics in Structural Engineering 3 2 5
I-20
Introduction to structural optimization, application to simple
structures such as trusses, and simple frames; Theory of plates
and its applications in Civil Engineering; folded plate design;
theory and design of shell structures specifically with application
in structures covering large area.
CE G522 Pavement Design, Maintenance and Man- 3 2 5
agement
Materials for road construction: specifications and tests on
binder, aggregate and soil; Asphalt mix design; Pavement struc-
ture; Stresses in flexible and rigid pavements; Design of flexible
and rigid pavements; Pavement Management System (PMS)
implementation and operation; Data base requirements; Road
condition surveys; Data management; Pavement condition
analysis; Determination of maintenance and rehabilitation needs
at network level; Panel inspection; Prioritization and optimiza-
tion; Budgets, programmes and plans of action.
CE G523 Transportation Systems Planning and Man- 3 1 4
agement
System and environment; sequential transportation systems
planning: trip generation, trip distribution, modal split and traffic
assignment. Transportation Systems Management (TSM) ac-
tions: traffic management techniques for improving vehicular
flow, preferential treatment for high occupancy modes, demand
management technique for reduced traffic demand, staggered
hours, vehicle restrictions; planning for pedestrians, parking
planning; Methods of accident data collection and analysis.
CE G524 Urban Mass Transit Planning, Operations 3 1 4
and Management
Modes of public transportation and application pf each to urban
travel needs; Comparison of transit modes and selection of
technology and transit service; Estimating demand in transit
planning studies and functional design of transit routes; Termi-
nal design; Management and operation of transit systems,
Model for operational management; Fleet and crew manage-
ment; Terminal management; Fiscal management.
CE G525 Water Resources Planning and Management 3 1 4
Introduction; Quantitative and qualitative assessment of water
resources; Engineering principles applied to the management of
water resources; Hydrographic and project surveys; Watershed
management; Measurement techniques in water resources en-
gineering; Gains of water resources planning to the society; Wa-
ter economics; Computer utilization areas; Project discussions;
Laboratory experiments.
CE G526 Systems Approach to Water Resources 3 1 4
Modeling
Introduction to system analysis; Water management models:
types and significance; Fundamentals of model development;
Model solution techniques (computational methods) such as
computer aided optimization, simulation, statistical analysis and
reliability considerations; Model calibration and verification;
Modeling of water quality subsystems and water quantity sub-
systems in various water bodies and its methods of analysis.
CE G527 Construction Management 3 1 4
Industry profile, parties involved, contracts, bonds, bidding,
changes, pre-planning, construction management approach and
partnering; Planning and scheduling, net-work based scheduling
systems (CPM), Resource management, Network acceleration,
PERT probabilistic approach.
CE G528 Selection of Construction Equipment and 3 1 4
Modeling
Selection and application of construction and earth moving
equipment; Productivity analysis of equipment operations;
mathematical models for construction operations; Quality issues
in construction process modeling.
CE G529 Construction Project Control Systems 3 1 4
Concepts, planning and organization; bar charts and schedule
networks; CPM computer software, Resource management;
Optimal project duration; Project estimates; Budgeting and cash
flow; Project control; PERT and line of balance; Project simula-
tion; Materials management and information systems; Claims;
Corrective actions; Total quality management; Equipment eco-
VI
nomics; Nature of design projects: (1) design of project schedul-
ing networks, (2) design of construction operations, (3) devel-
opment of project breakdown structure, and (4) development of
project cash flow design.
CE G530 Design of Construction Operations 3 1 4
Techniques for the design and analysis of construction opera-
tions to maximize productivity and minimize resource idleness;
Queuing theory, line of balance, simulation, probabilistic and
statistical methods applied to construction; An actual construc-
tion operation will be modeled and analyzed as part of the
course in the context of a term project.
CE G531 Environmental Conservation 3 1 4
Environmental management; impact of development schemes;
essentials of an environmental policy and an environmental act;
environmental issues and priorities, ecological effects of current
development process; energy resources and water resources
planning; Economics of pollution control; National conservation
strategy; Organisations dealing with environmental conserva-
tions.
CE G532 Advanced Soil Mechanics 3 1 4
Modern concept of soil structure and its application in explaining
its behaviour; effects of seepage on equilibrium of ideal soil;
mechanics of drainage; theories of elastic subgrade reaction;
theories of semi infinite elastic soils; vibration problems.
CE G533 Advanced Composite Materials for Struc- 3 1 4
tures
Introduction and History of FRP, Overview of Composite mate-
rials, Physical and Mechanical Properties and Test methods,
Design of RC Structures reinforced with FRP Bars, Flexural
Strengthening of RC Beams, Shear Strengthening of Beams,
Flexural Strengthening of Slabs, Strengthening of Axially and
Eccentrically Loaded Columns, Seismic Retrofit of Columns.
CE G534 Pavement Material Characterization 3 1 4
Field and Laboratory tests on soil, stabilization techniques. Ge-
osynthetics testing and specifications. Tests on aggregates in-
cluding the quarrying, crushing, stacking and gradation. Tests
on bitumen and importance of viscosity grading, tests on bitu-
men emulsions and application, tests on modified bitumen. Per-
formance grading of bitumen and the rheology test as per
ASTM standards. Bituminous mixture design using Marshall’s
and Super-Pave methods. Performance tests on bituminous
mixtures such as resilient modulus, dynamic modulus, creep
tests, 4-point bending fatigue test and Hamburg wheel tracking
rutting test. Pavement Quality Concrete (PQC) mixture design
and tests on joint filler and sealant materials. Admixtures for bi-
tuminous and cement concrete. Alternate materials such as Re-
claimed Asphalt Pavement (RAP) material, fly-ash, slags and
other marginal materials.
CE G535 Highway Geometric Design 3 1 4
Highway functional classification; route layout and selection,
design controls and criteria: turning paths, driver performance,
traffic characteristics; highway capacity; access control; safety;
environment; Elements of design: sight distance, horizontal
alignment, transition curves, super elevation and side friction;
vertical alignment: - grades, crest and sag curves; highway
cross-sectional elements and their design; at-grade Inter-
sections – sight distance consideration and principles of design,
canalization, mini roundabouts, layout of roundabouts, inter-
changes: major and minor interchanges, entrance and exit
ramps, acceleration and deceleration lanes, bicycle and pedes-
trian facility design; parking layout and design; terminal layout
and design.
CE G536 Traffic Engineering and Safety 3 1 4
Road users and their characteristics; traffic studies- volume,
speed, origin-destination (O-D) and delay studies; analysis and
interpretations of traffic studies; traffic forecasting; capacity and
level of service analysis; traffic characteristics at un-signalized
and signalized intersections; design of signalized intersections,
capacity and LOS of signalized intersections, actuated signal
control, signal coordination; traffic controls: signs, markings,
street furniture; traffic regulations; parking studies; nature of
traffic problems and their solutions; traffic safety: accidents- da-
I-21
ta collection and analysis; causes and prevention.
CE G537 Transportation Economics and Finance 3 1 4
Need for economic evaluation; concept of total transport cost;
fixed and variable costs, elasticity of demand, marginal costs;
value of travel time, accident costs; methods of economic eval-
uation; taxation in road transport, user charges: fees and tolls;
highway legislation; investment policies and pricing, issues in fi-
nancing and subsidy policy, public private partnership (PPP) op-
tions in transport sector: BOT, BOOT, BOLT; feasibility studies,
identification and sharing of risks in PPP projects, operation and
management agreements.
CE G538 Project Planning and Management 3 1 4
Foundations of project management: project life cycle, environ-
ment, selection, proposal, scope, ToR standardization; work
break down structure; network scheduling: critical path method
(CPM), programme evaluation and review technique (PERT),
planning and scheduling of activity networks; resource planning:
allocation, schedule compression, precedence diagram, gener-
alized activity network; estimation of project cost, earned value
analysis, monitoring project progress; quality assurance; con-
tract administration and management; mechanization and ad-
vanced process control; quality audit; milestones, bonus and
penalties; dispute resolution; capacity building and skill devel-
opment.
CE G539 Introduction to Discrete Choice Theory 4*
Introduction, element of choice process, individual preferences,
behavioral choice rule, utility based choice theory; data collec-
tion techniques, stated preference (SP) survey, revealed prefer-
ence (RP) survey, paradigms of choice data; discrete choice
models, property of discrete choice models, Multinomial logit
model; overview and structure, Nested logit model formulation;
discriminant analysis, Naive Bayes classification, classification
trees, classification using nearest neighbors; application of
fuzzy logic and artificial neural network in discrete choice mod-
eling.
CE G542 Water Resources and Management 3 1 4
Water resources system for different utilization; theory and ana-
lytical methods for minimum cost and optimum development;
analysis and design of multi-purpose water resources system;
engineering and economic principles applied to the manage-
ment of water resources.
CE G543 Traffic Flow Theory 3 1 4
Traffic flow elements: speed, volume and density and their rela-
tionships; time-space diagrams, controlled access concept,
freeway concept, system performances, measures of effective-
ness; mathematical modeling; probabilistic & stochastic models
of traffic flow process, discrete and continuous modeling: head-
ways, gaps and gap acceptance; macroscopic models; car-
following model; queuing models; fundamentals & development
of queuing processes; traffic simulation; intelligent transporta-
tion systems (ITS).
CE G544 Fracture Mechanics of Concrete Structures 3 1 4
Types of failure, Types of fracture, Modes of fracture, Fracture
criteria, Energy release rate, Stress intensity factor (SIF), SIF of
more complex cases, , Elastic plastic analysis through J-
integral, Crack tip opening displacement, Test methods, Fatigue
failure, Fracture mechanics of concrete: Need for fracture in
concrete, Linear Elastic fracture models, Elasto-plastic fracture
models, Nonlinear fracture models, RILEM fracture energy, sof-
tening of concrete, fracture process zone, size effect, Interface
fracture, Fracture behaviour of special concretes, Numerical
analysis.
CE G545 Airport Planning and Design 3 1 4
Air Transport structure and organization; forecasting air travel
demand, trend forecasts and analytical methods; air freight de-
mand; airport system; characteristics of the aircraft; airport ca-
pacity and configuration; airport master planning: site selection,
layout plan, orientation and length of runway as per ICAO speci-
fications; geometric design of runway taxiway and aprons; struc-
tural design of runway and taxiway pavements; airfield pave-
ment drainage; airport runway structural evaluation using Heavy
VI
Falling Weight Deflectometer (HFWD), overlay design. Passen-
ger terminal function, passenger and baggage flow, analysis of
flow through terminals, parking configurations and apron facili-
ties; air cargo facilities-flow through cargo terminals, airport
lighting; airport access problem; environmental impact of air-
ports.
CE G546 Highway Construction Practices 3 1 4
Road planning and reconnaissance; right of way selection; fix-
ing of alignment; road construction techniques: construction
staking, clearing and grubbing of the road construction area;
subgrade construction: excavation and filling, compaction,
preparation of sub grade, quality control tests as per MORTH
specifications; granular subbase and base course construction:
gravel courses, WBM, WMM, stabilized soil subbases, use of
geo-textiles and geo-grids; construction of bituminous layers;
concrete pavement construction; field quality control ; road mak-
ing machinery.
CE G547 Pavement Failures, Evaluation and Rehabili- 3 1 4
tation
Pavement deterioration, distress and different types of failures,
pavement surface condition deterioration such as slipperiness,
unevenness, rutting, cracking; pot holes, etc., causes, effects,
methods of measurement and treatment, use of modern equip-
ment for pavement surface condition measurements, Analysis
of data, interpretation. Structural deterioration of pavements:
causes, effects, methods of treatment. Structural evaluation of
flexible pavements by rebound deflection method, analysis of
data, design of overlay, use of FWD and other methods for
evaluation of flexible and rigid pavements and their application.
Evaluation of new pavement materials, model studies, pave-
ment testing under controlled conditions, accelerated testing
and evaluation methods, Test track studies. Instrumentation for
pavement testing.
CE G548 Pavement Management Systems 3 1 4
omponents of pavement management systems, pavement
maintenance measures; pavement performance evaluation:
general concepts, serviceability, pavement distress survey sys-
tems, performance evaluation and data collection using different
equipment; evaluation of pavement distress modeling and safe-
ty; pavement performance prediction: concepts, modeling tech-
niques, structural condition deterioration models, mechanistic
and empirical models, HDM-IV models, comparison of different
deterioration models, functional and structural condition deterio-
ration models; ranking and optimization methodologies: Recent
developments, economic optimization of pavement mainte-
nance and rehabilitation.
CE G549 Rural Road Technology 3 1 4
Network planning, accessibility and mobility; road alignment and
survey; geometric design: cross-sectional elements, sight dis-
tance, horizontal and vertical alignments; road materials and
use of marginal materials; pavement design, drainage, culverts
and small bridges; construction and specifications; quality con-
trol in construction; pavement failures; maintenance; prepara-
tion of detailed project report (DPR); community participation in
planning, design, construction and management.
CE G551 Dynamics of structures 3 1 4
Free and forced Vibration Analysis of SDOF system, Response
to general dynamic loadings, Numerical evaluation of dynamic
response, Effect of damping; Free and forced vibration of un-
damped and damped multi degree of freedom systems; Model-
ing for multi degree of freedom systems; Equation of motions,
Evaluation of natural frequencies and mode shapes, orthogonal-
ity conditions, Modal analysis and modal combination rules,
Numerical evaluation of dynamic response for multi degree of
freedom, time history analysis; support excited vibration, analy-
sis of non-linear systems, Free and forced vibration analysis of
continuous systems, Random vibrations, Stochastic response;
Vibration isolation, vibration absorber and tuned mass damper;
Evaluation of wind, blast, wave loading and other dynamic forc-
es on structure; Modeling and dynamic analysis of buildings,
bridges, water tank, liquid storage tanks, stack like structure,
machine foundations etc.
CE G552 Advanced Structural Mechanics and 3 1 4
I-22
Stability
Analysis of stress and strain in three dimension domain, devia-
toric stress and strain; stress and strain invariants, compatibility
conditions, equilibrium equations; stress-strain relations for ani-
sotropic, orthotropic and isotropic elastic materials; yield criteri-
on; plastic potential and flow rules. Problems on plane stress
and plain strain conditions, Airy stress function; Axi-symmetric
problems; torsion of prismatic bars, circular and non-circular
sections; thin-walled sections, membrane and sand-heap anal-
ogies, concept of stability of structures and examples of instabil-
ity. Stability of structures with one and two degree of freedom,
buckling of columns; beam-columns and simple frames, lateral
torsion buckling of beams; and introduction to postbuckling of
plates.
CE G553 Theory of Plates and Shells 3 1 4
Analysis procedure and the basic theory of plates and shells;
Different kinds of plates such as rectangular, circular, and ellip-
tical; Different kinds of shell structures such as shell of revolu-
tion: spherical shells, cylindrical shells and special shell struc-
tures; Principles and applications of bending of plates, mem-
brane theory, bending of shells, and stability of plates and
shells; Kirchoff theory, Reissner-Mindlin-Naghadi type theories,
rectangular plates-solution by double Fourier series, membrane
theory of shells, and case study on plates and shells using nu-
merical tools.
CE G554 Advanced Structural Design 3 1 4
Practical design problems on analysis and design of multistoried
and industrial buildings, chimney, retaining wall, water tank,
towers, etc using both the steel and concrete materials. Model-
ing of structures subjected to various load (DL, LL, WL, EQ etc.)
combinations, structural analysis, design, and detailing of spe-
cific advanced concrete and steel structures.
CE G555 Remote Sensing and GIS in Water Re- 4*
sources
Basic concepts of Remote Sensing (RS) and image processing;
photogrammetry; global positioning system and its application in
water resources; fundamentals of GIS; map projection; spatial
data modeling and analysis; integration of hydrologic models
and RS & GIS with relevance to surface and ground water re-
sources. advanced aspects of RS & GIS; case studies.
CE G556 Advanced Computational Hydraulics 4*
Ordinary and partial differential equations; finite difference
schemes and their variations, finite element methods and their
variations; implicit and explicit types; accuracy, convergence
and stability; applications to steady and unsteady flows in vari-
ous fields in hydraulics; one-, two- and three-dimensional flows;
Case Studies.
CE G557 Stochastic Hydrology 4*
Basics of statistics in hydrology, discrete and continuous distri-
butions and their applications to hydrological variables; parame-
ter estimation; hypothesis testing; regression analysis; classifi-
cation and characteristics of time series; autocorrelation analy-
sis; univariate and multivariate stochastic models; spectral anal-
ysis; case studies.
CE G558 Advanced Groundwater Hydrology 4*
Aquifers - hydraulic characteristics of aquifers (confined and un-
confined). Basic principles of ground water flow; Techniques of
artificial recharge; Well design; groundwater recharge basins
and injection wells; flow into aquifer with different boundaries
and special cases; ground water models (digital and analog
models): groundwater pollution, contaminant transport, remedia-
tion and legislation.
CE G559 Soft Computing in Water Resources 4*
Introduction and role of soft computing techniques such as
fuzzy logic, expert systems, evolutionary algorithms in water re-
sources engineering; classical sets and fuzzy sets; membership
functions; defuzzification; basics of expert systems and relevant
terminology; Procedure for development of knowledge base and
handling of uncertainty; fundamentals of evolutionary algo-
rithms; case Studies.
CE G560 Hydrologic Simulation Laboratory 4*
VI
Role of simulation and optimization modeling in water re-
sources; data mining techniques in hydrology; database man-
agement; applicability of hydraulic and hydrologic related simu-
lation models and softwares; applicability of optimization based
models and softwares.
CE G561 Impact of Climate Change on Water Re- 4
sources Systems
Introduction to anthropogenic climate change; impact of climate
change on hydrology and water resources; global climate tele-
connections; various modeling approaches including general
circulation models and downscaling approaches; selection crite-
ria; climate predictability and forecasting; limitations and uncer-
tainties; adaptability to climate change; Case Studies.
CE G562 Advanced Concrete Technology 4
Components of concrete; chemical properties of cement & ce-
mentitious paste; heat of hydration; microstructure of cementi-
tious paste; properties of aggregates; chemistry of mineral ad-
mixtures;chemistry of chemical admixtures; characterization of
powdered and solid block concrete; effect of concrete composi-
tion on properties of fresh concrete; rheology of concrete; effect
of concrete composition on properties of hardened concrete;
shrinkage and creep; correlation between micro- and specimen
level properties, interfacial transition zone (ITZ); durability of
concrete; prediction of concrete service life; techniques for non-
destructive evaluations (NDE) of concrete; green concrete; con-
crete with alkali activated binders (AAB); difference between al-
kali –activated binders and blended cements.
CE G563 Stochastic Methods in Civil Engineering 3 1 4
Uncertainty, Discrete and Continuous distributions, Hypothesis
testing, Classification and characteristics of time series, Auto-
correlation analysis, Multivariate data analysis by logistic re-
gression, discriminant analysis, cluster analysis, factor analysis,
queuing theory, Reliability analysis, Statistical quality control, In-
troduction to univariate and multivariate stochastic models,
markov chain and their properties, introduction to Transition
probability, case studies.
CE G564 Structural Health Assessment and Rehabili- 3 1 4
tation
Introduction, Overview of present repair, retrofitting, and
strengthening practices, Distress identification, Repair man-
agement, Causes of deterioration and durability aspects, Holis-
tic models of Deterioration of RCC, Durability Aspects, Intrinsic
and extrinsic causes an stage of Distress, Condition survey and
Non-destructive Evaluation, Classes of Damages and Repair
Classification, Structural Analysis and Design, Reserve
Strength, Evaluation of Building Configuration, Repair materials
and their selection, Rehabilitation and Retrofitting Methods,
Analysis and Design of Externally FRP and ECC Strengthened
Structures , Retrofitting using External Unbonded Post-
tensioning and Near Surface Mounted FRP Rebars, Durability
Based Design of FRP Reinforced/Strengthened Bridge Girders,
Case Study Problems.
CE G565 Transportation Planning 3 1 4
Basic concepts in transportation planning, accessibility and mo-
bility, land use interaction, government role in transportation
planning, characteristics of travel and transport problems;
transportation survey and data collection: planning, design and
implementation, travel analysis zone (TAZ) development, tradi-
tional four-step modelling process; analysis of travel behaviour
and demand: studying travel behaviour, analysing urban travel
markets; innovations in transportation modelling: travel behav-
iour model, activity-based models, econometric modelling using
r-studio, modelling travel demand with cube, transportation de-
mand management (TDM), transportation system management
(TSM), smart city transportation planning: transit-oriented de-
velopment (TOD),pedestrian-oriented development, liveable
street planning, multimodal transportation planning, shared mo-
bility concepts, integrated transportation management and
planning, transportation and energy, climate change, fuel choice
and green mobility.
CE G566 Public Transportation 3 1 4
Modes of public transportation, history and classification, transit
I-23
right of way, qualitative swot analysis. role of public and private
sectors in mass transit. transit planning and data collection. rid-
ership prediction, route determination, stopping policy, stop
spacing determination, transit network design: capacity, way
headway, station headway, safety regime, dwell time, frequen-
cy. vehicle capacity, transit operation scheduling: development
of time-table and determination of fleet size; and, crew schedul-
ing process, demand-based transit planning. fare structure and
collection technology. dynamic responsive transit planning.
transit system performance measures and benchmarking. inno-
vation in transit system technology
CE G567 Highway Design 3 1 4
Highway functional classification; design controls and criteria:
turning paths, traffic characteristics, highway capacity aspects,
access control, safety, environment; sight distances; horizontal
and vertical alignments; geometric design for expressways, at-
grade intersections rotaries and mini roundabouts, importance
of channelization and design of channelizing islands, intersec-
tion layouts; grade separated interchanges: types, layouts, suit-
ability, advantages and limitations of different types of inter-
changes, performance based design, geometric design con-
sistency; pedestrian-oriented development, liveable streets, bi-
cycle and pedestrian planning; on street and off street parking
layouts and design; layouts of truck terminals and bus bays; in-
troduction to geometric design software. plan and profile prepa-
ration using drafting and visualization software such as Auto-
CAD, Micro-station. Alignment design using MXROAD, Auto-
CAD Civil 3D, open road; checking swept path of turning vehi-
cles: AutoTrack, AutoTurn; Highway design manuals.
CE G568 Traffic Systems Analysis 3 1 4
Characteristics of traffic stream: Traffic flow, speed and density,
Traffic data collection. Modeling uninterrupted traffic flow: Mi-
croscopic and macroscopic modeling, Car-Following theory.
Capacity and level-of-service analysis: Concepts of capacity
and level-of-service (LOS) of highways, expressway, highway,
multi-lane highway and multi-modal LOS as per latest Highway
Capacity Manual (HCM). Traffic flow at Toll-Plazas: Queuing
theory, delay and queue length analysis of traffic at Toll-Plazas.
Traffic flow at un-signalized intersections: Gap acceptance theo-
ry and capacity estimation of traffic at un-signalized intersec-
tions. Traffic flow at signalized intersections: Delay and queue
length analysis of traffic at signalized intersections, design of
signals and concept of Co-ordinated signals. Adaptive signal
concepts., Advanced Intelligent Transport Systems (ITS). Intro-
duction to latest Traffic simulation packages, Exposure to rele-
vant codes of practice.
CE G569 Transportation Economics 3 1 4
Introduction to engineering economics. Transportation Demand
and Supply. Transportation Cost concept. Conceptual aspects
of Elasticity, Demand forecasting methods, factors influencing
transport demand, direct and cross-price elasticities of demand,
factors that cause shifts in demand function. Investment and fi-
nancing of transport: Revenue sources; expenditure sources;
traditional project delivery methods and innovation in financing.
Congestion pricing. Transport project evaluation: economic ap-
praisal; discount rate and time value of money; net present val-
ue; cost-benefit analysis and life cycle cost analysis as per
IRC:SP:30. Road User Cost Study (RUCS). Feasibility and
evaluation, cost, evaluation of alternatives, analysis techniques,
measures of land value and consumer benefits from transporta-
tion projects, prioritization of projects.
CE G570 Highway Construction Technology 3 1 4
Road planning and reconnaissance; right of way selection; fixing
of alignment; road construction techniques: construction staking,
clearing and grubbing; subgrade construction: excavation and
filling, compaction, preparation of sub grade, quality control tests
as per MoRT&H specifications; granular subbase and base
course construction: gravel courses, WBM, WMM, stabilized soil
subbases, use of geo-textiles and geo-grids; construction of bi-
tuminous layers; concrete pavement construction. Hot mix as-
phalt plants, road construction equipment, material placement
and compaction methods, shoulders, highway drainage and
roadside requirements; State of the art construction manage-
ment techniques, construction standards, quality control and
quality assurance including contract documents and arbitration.
VI
CE G571 Road Asset Management 3 1 4
Need for Road inventory data, purpose and types. Characteriza-
tion of pavement performance including the concept of pave-
ment condition index. Application of road roughness data includ-
ing the calibration for universal roughness standard. The non-
destructive measurement of structural condition of the pavement
at network and project level. Database Management with auto-
mated survey methods for distress prediction. Pavement deterio-
ration models, pavement maintenance and rehabilitation tech-
niques. Life cycle cost analysis using HDM4. Prioritization of
pavement maintenance strategies. Developing asset manage-
ment plans: financial plan, asset valuation, resource allocation.
Economic evaluation of alternative pavement design strategy
and selection of an optimal maintenance strategy.
CE G572 Transportation Data Analytics 3 1 4
Research Design Concepts in transportation, Data collection and
analysis techniques. Probability Distributions, Sampling and
Measurement, Interval Estimation, Hypothesis Testing, Analysis
of Variance. Simple, Multiple and Time-series Regression, Dy-
namic Regression Models, Structural Equation Models, Count
Data Models. Supervised Learning Methods: Tree-based Meth-
ods and Support Vector Machines. Clustering Methods: Dimen-
sionality Reduction (Principal Component Analysis, Independent
Component Analysis), Clustering Methods: Hierarchical cluster-
ing, K-Means Clustering, Mean Shift Clustering, Density-based
Clustering. Data analysis and modelling using R-Studio. Case
Studies –Traffic Operations, Pavement Materials and Quality
Control, Transportation Planning, Public Transit and Road safety
and Highway Geometric Design.
CE G573 Road Safety and Accident Analysis 3 1 4
Road safety, accident statistics and investigation, collision and
condition diagrams, accident data collection. Reactive and pro-
active measures of road safety, safe systems approach, black-
spot identification and mitigation measures, development of
safety performance functions, road safety audit (RSA), identifica-
tion and treatment of crash locations, economic analysis of road
safety measures, Application of intelligent transportation system
in road safety management, Accident investigation, Introduction
to Road safety manuals including IRC SP 88, PIARC Docu-
ments, AUSTROADS Documents, International Road Assess-
ment Program (I-RAP), Network-based safety analysis, Road
signs and markings and related codes, Accident Reconstruction.
CE G574 Pavement Maintenance 3 1 4
Importance of highway maintenance works and timely rectifica-
tion of defects in flexible pavements. Routine maintenance, pre-
ventive maintenance, periodic maintenance, special mainte-
nance, emergency repairs, patching of potholes, strengthening
and rehabilitation of road pavements and drainages. Causes of
distress in flexible and rigid pavements, failure of surface and
subsurface drainage systems. Maintenance of rural roads:
Gravel roads, bituminous roads, cell filled pavements, roller
compacted concrete pavement, interconnected block pavement.
Maintenance of urban roads: Flexible pavements, thin and ul-
trathin white topping, cobble roads, interconnected block pave-
ment, side drains and subsurface drainage layer, utility service
lines. Retrofitting of dowel bars in rigid pavement.
CE G575 Freight Transportation 3 1 4
Introduction to Freight System, Overview of three-layer structure
of freight: Global, Regional and Local, Freight Transport Industry
Structure: Maritime freight Transport, Air freight Transport, Road
freight Transport, Rail Freight Transport. Factors affecting freight
demand, Freight generation, Freight trip generation, Modelling
Inter-Regional Freight Demand Models. Use of GPS and Blue-
tooth Data for Freight Analysis, International best practices of
freight models. Freight Distribution Structures, Logistics Network
Planning, Distribution centers, urban freight consolidation cen-
ters and warehouses: location, design and operation, Ware-
house management and information, Material Management and
Inventory Theory, Economic Order Quantity, Demand forecast-
ing for inventory replenishment systems. Off-hour freight delivery
(OHD) schemes, Freight emission modelling, Humanitarian Lo-
gistics. Relief Network Models for Efficient Disaster Manage-
ment.
CE G576 Advanced Computational Modelling 3 1 4
I-24
Introduction to computational modelling and simulations for large
material deformation or flows; Theoretical basis and program-
ming of grid-based methods and mesh-free/ particle-based
methods; XFEM/ SPH/ Peridynamics/ Phase Field approaches
etc.; Constitutive modelling; Equation of states; Modelling of re-
al-life problems in structural, soil, rock and fluid mechanics;
Techniques for management and visualization of large data.
Pre-requisite: CE F435 OR CE G619 OR ME G512
CE G610 Computer Aided Analysis and Design in Civil 3 2 5
Engineering
Computer languages; CAD, graphics; database management
system; knowledge base expert system; development of prepro-
cessor and post processor with graphic interface; analysis and
design, optimization techniques, genetic algorithms, software
development for analysis and design, interfacing.
CE G611 Computer Aided Analysis and Design 3 2 5
The course aims at developing complete self reliance in solving
analysis & design problems of engineering with the aid of com-
puters. It stresses upon the use of more powerful tools including
system planning, simulation and modelling. The student will take
up a design project and will work independently on the project
guided by the instructor or resource person as and when re-
quired. The effort must culminate with a CAAD program and a
project report.
CE G612 Advanced steel Structures 3 1 4
Steel properties; high strength steels, structural behaviour, anal-
ysis and design; loads and environmental effects; load and re-
sistant factor design (LRFD); column and beams; connections;
member under combined loads; bracing requirements; compo-
site members; plastic analysis and design; tall steel buildings,
detailing in steel structures.
CE G613 Advanced concrete Structures 3 1 4
Materials; high strength concrete, flexure analysis and design;
shear and diagonal tension; bond and anchorage; serviceability;
torsion; columns; joints; indeterminate beams and frames; yield
line analysis; strip method for slabs; composite construction;
footing and foundations; concrete building system; concrete tall
buildings, detailing in concrete structures.
CE G614 Prestressed Concrete Structures 3 1 4
Effect of prestressing; source of prestress, prestressing steel;
concrete for construction; elastic flexure analysis, flexural
strength; partial prestressing; flexural design based on concrete
stress limits; tension profile; flexural design based on load bal-
ancing; losses due to prestress; shear diagonal tension and web
reinforcement; bond stress, transfer and development length,
anchorage zone design, deflections.
CE G615 Earthquake Engineering 3 1 4
Single and multi degree freedom system; seismic risk, causes
and effects of earthquakes; seismicity, determination of site
characteristics; design earthquakes; earthquake resistant design
philosophy; seismic response; earthquake resistant design of
structures; detailing for earthquake resistance in concrete and
steel structures.
CE G616 Bridge Engineering 3 1 4
Purpose of bridge; classification of bridges; characteristics of
each bridge; loads stresses and combinations; design of RC
bridges; design of non-composite and composite bridges; pre-
stressed bridge; continuous spans, box girders, long span bridg-
es; substructure design for bridges.
CE G617 Advanced Structural Analysis 3 1 4
Flexibility Method; stiffness method; beam curved in plan; two
dimensional and three dimensional analysis of structures; shear
deformations, shear wall analysis; interactive software develop-
ment for analysis of structures.
CE G618 Design of Multi-Storey Structures 3 1 4
Loads and stresses; building frames; framing systems, bracing
of multistorey building frames; diaphragms; shear walls and cov-
er; tube structure, approximate analysis and preliminary design;
frame analysis; design loading, wind effects and response,
earthquake response of structures.
VI
CE G619 Finite element analysis 3 2 5
Fundamentals of Finite Element Method (FEM); basic formula-
tions of FEM; assembly of elements, solution techniques; 2D
and 3D problems; review of the isoparametric elements; thin and
thick plate elements; introduction to shell formulations; use of
newly developed elements; mixed finite element method; mate-
rial and geometric nonlinear problems; application of FEM to civil
engineering problems, programming FEM.
CE G620 Advanced Foundation Engineering 3 1 4
Types of foundations, capacity and settlement of foundations,
soil properties, design considerations, discrete method for anal-
ysis, design of shallow and deep foundations, failure in founda-
tions, remedial measures, case studies of foundations.
CE G621 Fluid Dynamics 3 2 5
Mechanics of turbulent flow; semi-empirical expressions; statisti-
cal concepts; stability theory;flow of non-Newtonian fluids; sta-
tionary and moving shock waves; Prandtl-Mayer expressions;
two and three dimensional subsonic and supersonic flow; meth-
ods of characteristics; small perturbation theory and similarity
rules.
CE G622 Soil-Structure-Interaction 3 1 4
Importance of soil-structure interaction, basic theories, types of
interaction problems, numerical modelling, experimental and
field investigations, prediction of failure mechanism, economic
considerations.
CE G623 Ground Improvement Techniques 3 1 4
Requirements for ground improvement, various techniques of
improvement, water table lowering, ground freezing, electro-
osmosis, compaction, tamping, use of explosives, vibratory
probes, thermal treatment, addition of lime, cement and bitumen,
gravel and sand columns, preloading techniques, reinforced
earth, soil replacement techniques.
CE G631 Selected Topics in Soil Mechanics and Ge-3 1 4
otechnical Engineering
Formation of soil & soil deposits, subsurface exploration, col-
lapsible soils identification treatment & design consideration, re-
view of casting expansion models in soil, treatment of weak soil,
numerical modelling, fracture propagation & fracture energy, flu-
id infiltered materials, modern trends.
CE G632 Design of Foundations for Dynamic Loads 3 1 4
Evaluation and interpretation of geotechnical reports, selecting
foundation design parameters from laboratory and field tests,
Selection of foundation, Analysis and design of strip, isolated &
combined footing, circular and ring foundation, Design of raft
foundation using conventional rigid method, Coefficient of sub-
grade reaction, Winkler model for footings and mat on elastic
foundations, Proportioning and structural design of footings sub-
jected to combined vertical, moment and horizontal loads, Seis-
mic design of shallow foundations, ductile detailing, Analysis and
design of different type of pile foundations, piles subjected lateral
load, moment and uplift, piles subjected to dynamic loads, de-
sign of pile group and pile cap, Seismic design of pile founda-
tions and ductile detailing, Analysis and design of retaining walls,
reinforced earth wall design, seismic design of retaining struc-
ture, Analysis and design of machine foundations for reciprocat-
ing machines, impact type, rotary machines such as turbines,
turbo-generator, Computing static and dynamic stiffness of foun-
dations, soil-structure interaction, Optimization and computer
aided design of foundation, BIS, IRC, ACI, ASCE, AASTHO and
Euro code provisions on structural and earthquake resistant de-
sign of foundations.
CE G641 Theory of Elasticity and Plasticity 3 2 5
Basic equations of theory of elasticity; elementary elasticity prob-
lems in two and three dimensions; theories of plastic flow; prob-
lems in plastic flow of ideally plastic and strain hardening materi-
als; theory of metal forming processes.
Chemical Engineering
CHE F211 Chemical Process Calculations 3 0 3
Historical overview of Chemical Engineering, Principles of bal-
ancing with examples to illustrate differential and integral bal-
I-25
ances lumped and distributed balances, Material balances in
simple systems involving physical changes and chemical reac-
tions, Systems involving recycle, purge and bypass, Properties
of substances: single component & multicomponent, single and
multiphase systems. Ideal liquid and gaseous mixtures, Energy
balance calculations in simple systems, Introduction to Comput-
er aided calculations-steady state material and energy balances
for chemical plants
CHE F212 Fluid Mechanics 3 0 3
Dimensions and Units, Velocity and Stress Fields, Viscosity and
surface tension, Non-Newtonian flow, Introduction to Fluid Stat-
ics, Dimensional Analysis (Buckingham PI theorem), Types of
flows, Fluid Statics, Bernoulli equation, Differential and Integral
analysis methods of analysis, Navier Stokes equation, Potential
flows, Stream functions and velocity potential, Boundary Layer
Theory, Flow measurement, Pipe flow analysis, Flow past im-
mersed objects, Packed beds, Fluidized beds, Sedimentation,
Pumps and compressors Agitation and Mixing, (Power con-
sumption, mixing times, scale up), Introduction to Turbulent
Flows (Reynolds equations), Compressible flows.
CHE F213 Chemical Engineering Thermodynamics 3 0 3
Review of work, heat, reversible and irreversible processes, First
Law applications to closed and open systems, Second law, En-
tropy, and applications related to power and refrigeration, Heat
effects, Availability and Exergy analyses Equations of state and
generalized correlations for PVT behaviour, Maxwell relations
and fluid properties estimation; Residual and excess properties,
Partial molar quantities; Gibbs-Duhem Equation, Fugacity and
Activity Coefficient models, Vapour-liquid equilibria, Chemical
Reaction Equilibrium.
CHE F214 Engineering Chemistry 3 0 3
Organic chemistry – Important functional groups, their reactions
and named reactions, Physical chemistry – thermo-physical and
thermodynamic properties determination, phase rule, Adsorption
equilibria, Electrochemistry, Chemical methods of analysis, In-
strumental methods of analysis, Water and waste water chemis-
try and analysis, Corrosion, Engineering materials and inorganic
chemicals, Metals and alloys, Polymers, Fuels and fuel analysis.
CHE F241 Heat Transfer 3 0 3
Steady state and unsteady state conduction, Fourier’s law, Con-
cepts of resistance to heat transfer and the heat transfer coeffi-
cient. Heat transfer in Cartesian, cylindrical and spherical coor-
dinate systems, Insulation, critical radius, Convective heat trans-
fer in laminar and turbulent boundary layers, Theories of heat
transfer and analogy between momentum and heat transfer,
Heat transfer by natural convection, Boiling and condensation,
Radiation, Heat exchangers: LMTD, epsilon-NTU method, Co-
current counter-current and cross flows, NTU – epsilon method
for exchanger evaluation.
CHE F242 Numerical Methods for Chemical Engineers 3 0 3
Introduction to mathematical modelling and engineering problem
solving, Use of software packages and programming, Errors and
approximations including error propagation and Numerical error,
Roots of equations: Linear algebraic equations, 1-D and multi-
dimensional unconstrained optimization including gradient meth-
ods, Linear programming, Non-linear constrained Optimization,
Optimization with packages, Least Squares Regression includ-
ing quantification of error, Polynomial regression, Lagrange, in-
verse and spline interpolation and Fourier approximation, Engi-
neering applications, Numerical differentiation and integration,
Ordinary differential equations, Partial differential equations, En-
gineering applications
CHE F243 Material Science and Engineering 3 0 3
Introduction on materials for engineering, structures of metals,
ceramics and polymers; crystalline structure imperfections;
amorphous and semi-crystalline materials (includes glasses, in-
troduction to polymers); Correlation of structure to properties and
engineering functions (mechanical, chemical, electrical, magnet-
ic and optical); phase diagrams; Improving properties by con-
trolled solidification, diffusion or heat treatment; Failure analysis
and non-destructive testing; Types of materials (includes syn-
thesis, Fabrication and processing of materials): Polymers and
composites, Environmental degradation of materials (corrosion);
VI
Evolution of materials (functional materials, Biomimetic materi-
als, energy saving materials etc); Criteria for material selection.
CHE F244 Separation Processes I 3 0 3
Molecular diffusion in fluids, Interphase mass transfer, mass
transfer coefficient, Theories for interphase mass transfer, over-
all mass transfer coefficient and correlations, mass transfer with
chemical reaction, analogy between momentum, heat and mass
transfer, Absorption, Distillation including azeotropic and extrac-
tive distillation, Liquid-Liquid extraction, Leaching, Equipment for
absorption, distillation, extraction and leaching.
CHE F266 Study Project 3
These courses include projects which are oriented towards read-
ings from published literature or books about new frontiers of
development or analysis of available database. These courses
are normally available to students in second or higher levels.
These courses must coterminate with project reports.
CHE F311 Kinetics and Reactor Design 3 0 3
Kinetics Reaction rate, order, rate constant; Batch reactors De-
sign + basics; Kinetic constants from batch reactor data; Ideal
flow reactors Mass and Energy balances; Isothermal, adiabatic
and non-isothermal operation; Catalysts, Catalytic rates, Reac-
tion mechanisms; Internal/External transport in catalysts; Non-
catalytic solid-gas reactions; Reactor design for ideal flow reac-
tors; Kinetics of Solid Catalyzed Reactions; Yield and Selectivity;
Concept of RTD; Segregation and Maximum Mixedness models.
CHE F312 Chemical Engineering Lab I 0 3 3
This course aims to help students gain practical experience us-
ing laboratory-scale experiments to supplement theory courses
taught in classroom with major focus on chosen experiments
from Fluid Mechanics, Engineering Chemistry, Heat transfer and
Separation Processes – 1. Students will collect and analyze ex-
perimental data using theoretical principles related to relevant
courses already covered in previous Semesters.
CHE F313 Separation Processes II 3 0 3
Special equilibrium based separations like humidification and
water cooling, Drying of wet solids, adsorption, crystallization
etc., Mechanical separations like filtration, centrifugation, froth
floatation etc., Solid separations based on size reduction includ-
ing sieving operations and related equipment like crushers, mills,
pulverizers etc., special separation processes like ion-exchange,
membranes, chromatography etc.
CHE F314 Process Design Principles I 3 0 3
Process invention using heuristics and analysis (The Design
process, Process creation and heuristics for process synthesis,
Molecular structure design, Role of process simulators Like As-
pen, Chemcad, Hysys etc. in process creation), Detailed process
synthesis using algorithmic methods with emphasis on reactor
networks, separation trains, batch processes, heat integration
etc.
CHE F315 Machine Learning for Chemical 3 0 3
Engineers
Introduction to machine learning and relevance in Chemical En-
gineering, Univariate and multivariate techniques of data pro-
cessing; Dimensionality reduction; Machine learning techniques
for process modelling; Supervised algorithms (Regression, Artifi-
cial Neural Network, Bayes technique, Support Vector Machine
etc.); Unsupervised algorithms (Principal component analysis, k-
Means Clustering, Hierarchical Clustering, Hidden Markov mod-
els etc.); Application to Chemical engineering Problems (reac-
tors, distillation, pumps, heat exchangers etc.) using suitable
computational platforms.
Pre-requisite: CHE F242: Numerical Methods for Chemical En-
gineers OR MATH F313: Numerical Analysis
CHE F341 Chemical Engineering Laboratory II 0 3 3
This course aims to help students gain practical experience us-
ing laboratory-scale experiments to supplement theory courses
taught in classroom with major focus on chosen experiments
from Kinetics and Reactor Design, Process Dynamics and Con-
trol and Separation Processes – 2. Students will collect and ana-
lyze experimental data using theoretical principles related to rel-
evant courses already covered in previous Semesters.
I-26
CHE F342 Process Dynamics and Control 3 0 3
Introduction to process control, Theoretical models of chemical
process, Laplace Transforms, Transfer functions and state
space models, Dynamic response of first and second order pro-
cesses, Effect of dead time, Dynamics response of more compli-
cated systems, Development of empirical models from empirical
data, Feedback control, Control system instrumentation, Over-
view of Control system design, Dynamic behavior and stability of
closed loop system using root locus, frequency response using
Bode and Nyquist plots, PID controller design and tuning, Con-
trol system design based on frequency response analysis, Feed
forward, cascade and ratio control, Introduction to multivariable
control system, identification of interaction, design of controllers
in interactions, elimination of interactions, Control strategies for
common industrial processes such distillation, heat exchangers,
etc. Control strategies for Batch processes.
CHE F343 Process Design Principles II 3 0 3
Review of process synthesis, Design and sizing of equipment of
heat exchangers, separation towers, pumps etc. Cost account-
ing and capital cost estimation, Annual costs, earnings and prof-
itability analysis, optimization of process flow sheets, Steps in-
volved in designing configured industrial systems like solar de-
salinators, fuel cells, hand warmers etc.
CHE F366 Lab Project 3
CHE F367 Lab Project 3
These courses include projects involving laboratory investigation
or laboratory development in the students discipline or interdis-
ciplinary areas. These courses are normally available to stu-
dents in third or higher levels. These courses must coterminate
with project reports.
CHE F376 Design Project 3
CHE F377 Design Project 3
These courses are intended to impart training in design of prod-
uct/ process or other artifact to the students in the discipline or
interdisciplinary areas. These courses are normally available to
students in third or higher levels. These courses must cotermi-
nate with project reports.
CHE F411 Environmental Pollution Control 3 0 3
Air & water pollutants; sampling and analysis; control methods
for air & water pollutants; modeling of different control tech-
niques; advanced wastewater treatment processes; solid waste
management, noise pollution; case studies; associated laborato-
ry.
CHE F412 Process Equipment Design 3 0 3
Application of principles of Chem. Engg. to the selection and de-
sign of equipment for Chemical industries; design, cost estima-
tion and selection of process equipment; piping, pressure ves-
sels, heat exchangers, distillation columns etc. Use of computer
software packages in the design; plant safety practices; use of
codes.
CHE F413 Process Plant Safety 3 0 3
Role of safety in society. Engineering aspects of process plant
safety. Chemical hazards and worker safety. Hazardous proper-
ties of chemicals. Safety aspects in site selection and plant lay-
out. Design and inspection of pressure vessels. Storage, han-
dling and transportation of hazardous chemicals. Risk assess-
ment methods. Toxic release, fire and explosions. Boiling liquid
expanding vapor explosions. Safety audit. Emergency planning
and disaster management. Case studies.
CHE F414 Transport Phenomena 3 0 3
Analogy for momentum, heat and mass transport; shell balance
approach for analysis of individual and simultaneous momen-
tum, heat and mass transport; hydrodynamic and thermal
boundary layers; velocity, temperature and concentration distri-
butions in turbulent flow; interphase transport for isothermal and
non-isothermal systems.
CHE F415 Molecular and Statistical Thermodynamics 3 0 3
Fundamental of Statistical Mechanics, Quantum Mechanics,
Postulates, Concept of Ensembles, Intermolecular Potential En-
ergy functions; Distribution functions: Radial Distribution Func-
VI
tion (RDF); Applications of Statistical Mechanics: Thermo-
physical property calculations in ensembles; Cooperative Phe-
nomenon: Phase Equilibria: Ising model, Gibbs Ensemble (VLE),
Thermodynamic Integration, Gibbs-Duhem Integration, Free En-
ergy calculation; Virial EOS: second virial coefficient; Special
Applications: From Surface Adsorption: Adsorption Isotherm.
Molecular Simulation Techniques: Molecular Dynamics and
Monte Carlo Simulation, Monte Carlo Simulation in various En-
semble.
CHE F416 Process Plant Design Project I 3
This course aims to train the student on various aspects involved
in design of a process plant. It may be for a Battery limit (B/L)
plant or for a Grass roots project. The design will have to be
submitted in the form of a standard report. There would be two
major submissions: (i) Process selection and PFD, (ii) Material
and Energy Balance. This part of the project in conjunction with
Process Plant Design Project 2 is a Basic Process Package Re-
port for a complete process plant.
CHE F417 Process Plant Design Project II 3
This course is an extension of Process Plant Design Project 1
and aims to train the student on various aspects involved in de-
sign of a process plant. It may be for a Battery limit (B/L) plant or
for a Grass roots project. The design will have to be submitted in
the form of a standard report. There would be three major sub-
missions in relation to the process selected in Process Plant De-
sign Project 1: (i) Process Design, (ii) Mechanical design, (iii)
Costing. This part of the project in conjunction with Process
Plant Design Project 1 is part of detailed engineering and eco-
nomics for a complete process plant.
CHE F418 Modelling and Simulation in Chemical En-3 0 3
gineering
Mathematical model and necessity, Introduction to modeling,
Physical and Mathematical models, Modelling in Chemical Engi-
neering, Formulation of dynamic models with case studies based
on mass, component, momentum and energy balances, Model-
ing of selected fluid flow, heat transfer, mass transfer and reac-
tion engineering phenomena, Role of Simulation and simulators,
Sequential and modular approaches to Process Simulation,
Equation solving approach, Decomposition of networks, Conver-
gence promotion, Specific purpose simulation, Introduction to
role of evolutionary computation in simulation.
CHE F419 Chemical Process Technology 3 0 3
Process synthesis concepts for flow sheet generation - Unit op-
erations and unit processes, General principles applied in study-
ing a chemical industry; Chemical processes based on agricul-
tural and sylvi-cultural raw materials - Sugar, starch, alcohol, cel-
lulose, etc; Selected technologies for chemicals from inorganic
chemical industry covering contact process, fertilizer, chloral-
alkali, cement and lime; Natural product industry covering manu-
facture of oils, soaps, detergents, paper and pulp, Coal and vari-
ous coal-chemicals, Petroleum and petrochemical products,
Raw materials and principles involved in the production of olefins
and aromatics, Acetylene, Butadiene and typical intermediates
from olefins and aromatics such as ethylene glycol, ethyl ben-
zene, phenol, cumene and DMT/PTA, Dyes and pharmaceuti-
cals.
CHE F421 Biochemical Engineering 3 0 3
Basics of Microbiology and Biochemistry; Introduction to Bio-
chemical engineering, Mass and energy balance in microbial
processes; Microbial growth, Substrate utilization and product
formation kinetics; Medium and air sterilization; Enzyme kinetics
and immobilized enzyme systems; Design of batch, continuous
and fed-batch bioreactors; Transport Phenomena in biological
reactors; Scale-up principles for biochemical processes; Instru-
mentation and control of bioprocesses, Bio-separations.
CHE F422 Petroleum Refining Technology 3 0 3
Current world oil and gas scenario; History and development of
refining; Petroleum industry in India; Origin, formation, and com-
position of petroleum; Classification and evaluation of crude oils;
Petroleum products and test methods; Crude oil distillation;
Thermal, catalytic and finishing processes; Product blending;
Lube oil and bitumen (asphalt) manufacturing processes.
CHE F423 Membrane Science and Engineering 3 0 3
I-27
Overview of membrane separation processes;Introduction to
membranes; Polymeric membranes;Non-polymeric membranes;
polymer synthesis;polymer characterization; Metallic mem-
branes;Zeolites; Metal Organic Frameworks; Liquidmembranes;
Phase inversion; Thermodynamics ofPhase inversion; Dip coat-
ing; Track etching; ChemicalVapor Deposition; Morphology of
membranes;Hydrophilicity; Ultrafiltration; Microfiltra-
tion;Nanofiltration; Reverse Osmosis; Pervaporation;Membrane
distillation; Gas separation; Biomedicalengineering applications;
Plate and Frame modules;Spiral wound modules; Hollow fiber
membranemodules; Membrane contactors; Pore diffu-
sion;Solution diffusion mechanism; Mathematical modelingof
membrane separation processes; Membrane foul-
ing;Concentration polarization; Cake layer formation; Gellayer
formation; Membrane cleaning; Industrialmembrane installations;
Economics of membraneplants; Opportunities for membrane
technology instart-up ecosystem.
CHE F424 Rheology of complex fluids 3 0 3
Introduction to complex fluids, origins of non-Newtonian behav-
iour; fundamentals of rheology;rheological measurements and
properties; linear andnon-linear viscoelasticity; time-temperature
superposition, Boltzmann superposition principle,types of flow
fields; various characterizationtechniques; techniques in oscilla-
tory shear rheology;theoretical models for visco-elastic fluids;
Maxwellmodel, Kelvin–Voigt model, Generalized Maxwellmodel,
Oldroyd model; rheology of dilute polymersolutions, ideal chain
conformations, real chainconformations, unentangled polymer
dynamics,entangled polymer dynamics; rheology of two phas-
esystems, rheology of soft glassy materials, physicalaging and
rejuvenation.
CHE F433 Corrosion Engineering 3 0 3
Corrosion principles: electrochemical aspects, environmental ef-
fects, metallurgical & other aspects; various forms of corrosion.
Materials: metals and alloys, non-metallics (polymers and ce-
ramics). Corrosion prevention: materials selection, alternation of
environment, design, cathodic and anodic protection, coatings.
CHE F471 Advanced Process Control 3 0 3
Process identification and adaptive control; Model predictive
control structures; Model-based control structures; State estima-
tion; Synthesis of control systems-some case studies; intelligent
control.
CHE F491 Special Project 3
This is an unstructured open-ended course where under the
overall supervision of an instructor-in-charge, batches of stu-
dents will be attached to different instructors. Each batch will
work on a specific time-bound project which is of basic or pe-
ripheral concern of his discipline. Each student must submit a
project report as a culmination of his endeavour and investiga-
tion. The instructor- in-charge will determine the choice of the
project and also whether or not the project report is to be submit-
ted jointly by a group or individually by a student. The course will
aim to evaluate student's actual ability to use the fundamentals
of knowledge and to meet new unknown situations as demon-
strated by the students' interaction with the instructors and in-
structor-in- charge and aggregated in the project report. The in-
structor-in- charge may assign specific hours for formal brain-
storming sessions.
CHE F497 Atomic and Molecular Simulations 3
Particle based simulations at atomic and molecular level. Molec-
ular dynamics (MD), Lyapunov exponent, various algorithms for
integrating the equation of motion, Verlet algorithm. Monte Carlo
(MC) algorithm, Trial moves, MD and MC in various ensembles,
thermostats, barostats etc. Hands-on simulations using
GROMACS or LAMMPS or similar. Free energy calculations and
phase equilibria. Various other applications of molecular me-
chanics calculations. State of the art development in the field,
latest force fields, parameterization techniques etc. Introduction
to density functional theory (DFT), Hands on simulations using
any DFT packages such ADF or GAUSSIAN or GPAW or VASP
or similar.
CHE F498 Colloids and Interface Engineering
VI
Colloids – Intermolecular forces and Properties of the colloids.
Interface and Surface active agents – Thermodynamics of inter-
faces, interfacial rheology and transport process, surface free
energy, surface tension, thermodynamics of micelle and mixed
micellar formation, electrical phenomena at interfaces. Emulsion,
Micro emulsion and Foam – Preparation, mechanism and stabi-
lization, characterization and application of foams. Measurement
techniques – Interfacial tension, contact angle, zeta potential
and particles size. Industrial applications – Applications of vari-
ous interfacial phenomena in the industries. Nanomaterials –
Application of surface active agent through the surface modifica-
tion for the synthesis of nanostructured material.
CHE G511 Fluidisation Engineering 3 1 4
Fundamentals, industrial applications; study, design and opera-
tion of fluidisation units.
CHE G512 Petroleum Refining and Petro- Chemicals 3 1 4
Origin, formation and composition of petroleum; history and de-
velopment of refining; refinery products and test methods; classi-
fication and evaluation of oil stocks, fractionation of petroleum;
thermal and catalytic processes; properties & production of pet-
rochemicals.
CHE G513 Environmental Management Systems 3 2 5
Introduction to air & water pollutants & solid wastes; sampling &
analysis techniques; impact of these on environment; national &
international regulations; ISO series; conventional & non-
conventional energy resources; life cycle analysis; environmen-
tal audit; sustainable developments; case studies.
CHE G514 Evolutionary Computation 5
Non-traditional optimization techniques; population based search
algorithms; evolutionary strategies; evolutionary programming;
simulated annealing; genetic algorithms; differential evolution;
different strategies of differential evolution; Memetic algorithms;
scatter search; ant colony optimization; self-organizing migrating
algorithm; other emerging hybrid evolutionary computation tech-
niques; engineering applications involving highly non-linear pro-
cesses with many constraints and multi-objective optimization
problems.
CHE G521 Chemical Engineering Analysis 2 2 4
Mathematical analysis of chemical engineering problems; intro-
duction to modelling and simulation techniques in the analysis of
systems; emphasis on applying mathematical techniques to real
Chemical Engineering processes and on physical and mathe-
matical interpretation of results; use of computer software for
analysis and solution of mass and energy balances problems for
complex processes.
CHE G522 Polymer Technology 3 1 4
Polymerisation techniques; classification of polymers; mecha-
nism and kinetics of formation of polymers; different techniques
for determination of different types of molecular weights; polymer
structure; definition and measurement of glass transition and
crystalline melting temperatures; viscoelasticity and rubber elas-
ticity behaviour; degradation and stability; polymer processing;
rheology and applications. The course will terminate with several
design projects on real life problems.
CHE G523 Mathematical Methods in Chemical Engi- 3 2 5
neering
An introduction to mathematical modelling and simulation, Fun-
damentals of functional analysis, Linear algebraic equations and
related numerical schemes, ODE’s IVP and related numerical
schemes, Partial differential equations and related numerical
schemes, Optimization and related numerical schemes, Applica-
tion of the above principles to solving problems in Chemical En-
gineering, Role of computer programming and packages in prob-
lem solving.
CHE G524 Introduction to Multiphase Flow 3 1 4
Introduction to multiphase flow, Single particle motion, Bubble
and droplet transition, Marangoni effects, Bubble growth and col-
lapse, Cavitation, Flow patterns, Internal flow energy conver-
sions, Homogenous flows, Flows with bubble and gas dynamics,
Sprays, Granular flows, Drift flux models, System instabilities.
I-28
CHE G525 Chemical Process and Equipment Design 3 1 4
The nature and function of process design, Flow sheet prepara-
tion and drawing, Process Planning Scheduling and Flow Sheet
Design, P and I diagrams, Piping Design, Pump size selection.
Design information and data, Specification and design of pro-
cess equipment, Rules of THUMB for design of equipment,
Software use in process design, Process design of equipment in
heat and mass transfer, reactors, pumps, etc., Mechanical de-
sign of selected equipment.
CHE G526 Nuclear Engineering 3 1 4
Review of Nuclear Physics, Mechanism of nuclear fission, Fis-
sion cross section, Fission products, Reactor Physics, Types of
nuclear reactors, Construction and control of nuclear reactors,
Heat transfer in nuclear reactors, Design and operation, Reactor
shielding, Nuclear fuels, Moderators, Coolants, Reflectors and
structural materials, Nuclear fuel cycle, Spent fuel characteris-
tics, Reprocessing techniques role of solvent extraction in repro-
cessing, Reactor control and safety.
VI
I-29
CHE G527 Energy Conservation and Management 3 1 4
Energy conservation, Growth and demand of energy, Energy
availability, Comparison of specific energy use in select industry,
Potential and status of energy in India, Energy saving potential
in industries, Potential of energy efficiency in India, Energy
available for industrial use and the role of conservation, Energy
management and policy, Comprehensive energy conservation
planning (CECP), Definition and principles of energy conserva-
tion, Energy conservation technologies, Cogeneration concept
and scope, Energy audit and management. Energy conservation
in utilities.
CHE G528 Introduction to Nano Science and 3 1 4
Technology
Introduction to nano-science, Basic idea of solid state physics
and quantum mechanics, Quantum wells, Wires and dots, Prop-
erties of nanomaterials, Carbon nanotubes, Nanosynthesis,
Characterisation methods, Application of nano-materials to vari-
ous fields like electronics, medical, MEMS, photonics, molecular
switches and others, Special reference to Chemical Engineering
as in catalysis, heat transfer and special additive and perfor-
mance materials (nanofluids, nanocomposites), Future of nano
science and technology, Large scale manufacture and techno-
logical issues.
CHE G529 Pulp and Paper Technology 3 1 4
Selection of pulp and paper making raw materials, Wood Anat-
omy- identification, Preparation of wood chips, Chip screening,
Storage and chip conveying, Chemical composition of fibrous
raw materials, Chemical Pulping, Mechanical Pulping, Chemical
thermo-mechanical (CTP) processes, Waste Paper Pulping,
Bleaching and washing, Chemical Recovery, Description of vari-
ous grades of pulp & paper, Mechanical and chemical properties
of pulp, Paper making, cellulose derivatives- preparation & end
use, Environmental aspects in pulp and paper industry.
CHE G531 Project Engineering 2 2 4
Project feasibility studies and report; Project appraisal; Project
solution and evaluation; Project planning; Economic decision
making; Project preparation and management.
CHE G532 Alternate Energy Resources 3 1 4
The scope and present day technology in utilization of solar en-
ergy, wind power, tidal power, geothermal power, M.H.D. and
fuel cells.
CHE G533 Petroleum Product Characterization 3 2 5
Methods of estimation of characterization parameters for pure
hydrocarbons; methods of characterization of petroleum frac-
tions and products; experimental methods on measurement of
basic properties obtained from laboratory testing; methods of
prediction of properties for defined mixtures from pure-
component properties (normal boiling point, density, molecular
weight, critical properties, etc.); methods of prediction of proper-
ties for undefined mixtures based on certain bulk properties;
characterization methods for light and heavy as well as narrow
and wide boiling range mixtures; predictive methods for some
characteristics specifically applicable to petroleum fractions that
affect the quality of a fuel; standard test methods recommended
by ASTM for various properties; minimum laboratory data need-
ed to characterize various fractions as well as analysis of labora-
tory data and criteria for development of a predictive method; in-
troduction to characterization of crude oils and reservoir fluids;
associated Petroleum Laboratory experiments.
CHE G541 Process Plant Simulation 2 2 4
Computer aided analysis of chemical process systems; classifi-
cation and development of mathematical models to various
chemical engineering systems; decomposition of networks; tear-
ing algorithms; numerical methods for convergence promotion
and solving chemical engineering problems; traditional & non-
traditional optimization techniques; specific purpose simulation;
dynamic process plant simulation; case study problems using
professional software packages.
CHE G542 Computational Transport Phenomena 3 2 5
VI
Concepts; partial differential equations: types, boundary condi-
tions, finite difference scheme, error analysis, grid generation,
stability criteria; conduction and convection : two-dimensional
steady state problem, methods for solving coupled algebraic
equations, finite element method; fluid flow : governing equa-
tions, various approach of simulation (stream-vorticity, primitive
variable), staggered grid, similarity solution, Newton-Raphson
method, explicit and implicit formulation; solution of Navier-
Stokes equations : solution of full and parabolized equations,
unsteady flow, MAC, SIMPLE algorithm, RNS method; Mass
Transfer : dynamic model, mass transfer with simultaneous con-
vection and diffusion, transient multicomponent diffusion; short
projects on development of codes for various real life problems
involving transport processes.
CHE G551 Advanced Separation Technology 3 2 5
A brief overview of the existing separation technologies such as
adsorption-based separation, membrane separation, cryogenic
separation, and biotechnology-based separation. Recent ad-
vancements on the above areas and the new concepts such as
simulated moving bed adsorption, thermally coupled pressure
swing adsorption, reactive distillation, bio-filtration, supercriti-
calfluid extraction etc. This course will terminate with several de-
sign projects on real life problems.
CHE G552 Advanced Transport Phenomena 5
Viscosity, thermal conductivity and diffusivity, Shell momentum
and energy balance, equations of change for isothermal and
non-isothermal systems, Concentration distribution in solids and
laminar flows, momentum, thermal and concentration boundary
layers near walls, origin of turbulence, length scales in turbulent
flows, Reynolds (RANS) equations, estimates of Reynolds stress
(k-epsilon and k-omega type models), turbulent shear flow near
a wall, turbulent flow in pipes and channels, turbulent heat trans-
fer, Introduction to large eddy simulations models, rheology and
material functions, non-Newtonian viscosity and generalized
Newtonian models, Linear and non-linear visco-elasticity, radia-
tion heat transfer, multi-component systems, Coupled heat and
mass transfer, evaporation, boiling and condensation, chemical
reactions, Special topics: Flow through porous media, compress-
ible flows, multiphase flow, Transport phenomena in biochemical
systems.
CHE G553 Statistical Thermodynamics 4
Review: Classical thermodynamic and elementary Statistical
Mechanics, Macroscopic and microscopic descriptions of the
state of a system, Equilibrium ensembles, the partition function
and thermodynamic properties; System of independent particles;
Fluctuations and the compressibility equation; Chemical equilib-
rium in ideal gas mixtures; Molecular based equations of state,
SAFT, Lattice statistics; Real gases, Virial equation; The liquid
state: lattice models, distribution functions theories, perturbation
theories; Liquid mixtures: solution theories and local composition
models, Statistical thermodynamics of electrolytes.
CHE G554 Computational Fluid Dynamics 4
Introduction to CFD, Equations of change for momentum, energy
and mass transport, introduction to partial differential equations,
Numerical analysis and discretization techniques, Managing un-
certainties in CFD, grid generation, application of CFD to solve
Chemical Engineering problems, Introduction to COMSOL, data
analysis, validation and post processing.
CHE G556 Electrochemical Engineering 4
Basic physics of galvanic cells, Electrochemical Energy conver-
sion, Electrochemical Energy storage, Equivalent circuit dynam-
ics, Impedance spectroscopy, Impedance of electrodes, Nernst
equation, Fuel cells and batteries, Faradic equations in dilute so-
lutions, Butler Volmer equation, Reactions in concentrated solu-
tions, Ion absorption and intercalation, Concentration polariza-
tion, forced convection in fuel cells, Transient diffusion, Warburg
impedance, Diffusion in concentrated solutions, Transport in bulk
electrolytes, Ion concentration polarization, Double layer struc-
ture, Transport on porous media, Porous electrodes, Super ca-
pacitors, Electrostatic correlations.
CHE G557 Energy Systems Engineering 4
Cradle to grave overview of major current and future energy
conversion processes. Energy sources such as coal, natural
I-30
gas, petroleum, biomass, uranium, wind, and solar. Fuel pro-
cessing techniques such as Fischer-Tropsch synthesis, gasifica-
tion, methane reforming, and CO reforming. Power generation
2
technologies including steam turbines, gas turbines, wind tur-
bines, fuel cells, and solar panels. Sustainability impact factors
including water consumption, smog formation, and CO emis-
2
sions. Advanced processing techniques such as combined cy-
cles, turbine/fuel cell hybrids, and CO capture technologies.
2
Real world use and application.
CHE G558 Chemical Process Optimization 4
Introduction to Process Modelling and simulation, Fundamentals
of analytical optimization. Survey of one dimensional line-search
methods, and multi-dimensional unconstrained and constrained
numerical optimization algorithms. Applications of linear pro-
gramming, nonlinear programming, mixed integer linear/ nonlin-
ear programming, and parameter estimation in chemical engi-
neering. Feasible-path and infeasible-path techniques for chemi-
cal process flowsheet optimization, Evolutionary computation in
Chemical Engineering.
CHE G559 Reactor Physics and Engineering 5
Nuclear Reactions, Binding Energy, Fission Reactions, Fissile
and Fertile Materials, Radioactive Decay; Neutron Cross Sec-
tions, Nuclear Fuel Properties, Moderators, Energy Spectra, Infi-
nite Medium Multiplication, Power Reactor Core & Kinetics, Neu-
tron Balance & Diffusion Equation, Four-factor formula, Two-
group analysis, criticality equation, Electrical power generation
from nuclear fission, fundamental aspects of fission chain reac-
tion, and reactor design. Reactor concepts & types, their static
and dynamic characteristics Reactor operation and control,
Startup and shut down of systems.
CHE G560 Nuclear Fuel Cycle and Waste Management 5
Processing of nuclear fuel with descriptions of mining, milling,
conversion, enrichment, fabrication, irradiation & properties of ir-
radiated fuel, reprocessing, and waste disposal. In-core and out-
of-core nuclear fuel management design, Nuclear power plant
and fuel cycle economics, Management of spent fuel, high-level
waste, uranium mill tailings, low-level waste and decommission-
ing wastes. Fundamental processes and governing equations for
waste management systems, safety assessment of waste dis-
posal facilities, Chemical Engineering operations in Nuclear fuel
manufacture, waste reprocessing operations and waste man-
agement, Process Engineering for Nuclear Industry.
CHE G561 Nuclear Reactor Control and Instrumenta-4
tion
Fundamentals of process instrumentation and control, Open and
closed loops, SCADA and DDC, PLC, Alarms and Safety inter-
locks for shutdown and emergency shutdown, special sensors
and sensor specifications for Nuclear Industry, Nuclear reactor
safety, Special control logic for Nuclear safety, reliability and re-
dundancy, Nucleonics: application of Nuclear materials and ra-
diation in measurement techniques, Nucleonics based instru-
ments for analysis, Design, maintenance and operation of such
instruments. Calorimetry, detection of alpha, beta and gamma
rays including spectrometry, liquid scintillation counting.
CHE G562 Thermal Hydraulics and Heat Transfer 4
Thermal-hydraulic core design and analysis of nuclear systems,
Single and two-phase flow, Flow regimes, pressure drops, fric-
tional losses, pumping power modeling of fluid systems. Design
constraints imposed by thermal-hydraulics heat generation, tem-
perature distribution, heat removal, reactor heat sources & cool-
ants, departure from nucleate boiling, boiling heat transfer, criti-
cal heat flux conduction in reactor components and fuel ele-
ments, heat transfer in reactor fuel bundles and heat exchang-
ers, application of CFD in thermo-hydraulics of core.
CHE G563 Nuclear Chemical Engineering 4
Solvent Extraction, Ion Exchange, Decontamination, Isotope
Separation, Unit operations and processes used in the Produc-
tion of Heavy Water, Desalination, Thermo-chemical Cycle for
Hydrogen Production, district heating, nuclear propulsion, waste
processing including vitrification.
CHE G564 Nuclear Materials and Radiation Damage 4
Nuclear Materials; fabrication and quality control, non – destruc-
VI
tive evaluation and irradiation behavior of uranium, plutonium
and thorium based ceramic, metallic and composite fuels; fuel
failure, post irradiation examination and mitigation of fuel failure;
fabrication, heat treatment, property evaluation and irradiation
behavior of fuel cladding and core structural materials e.g. alu-
minum & alloys for research reactors, zirconium alloys for water
cooled nuclear power reactors and stainless steels and oxide
dispersion strengthened (ODS) steel for fast reactors; physical,
chemical and instrumental methods of analysis of nuclear mate-
rials and real time accounting of nuclear materials, radiation
damage of nuclear fuels, pressure vessel, pressure tubes and
other structural materials including radiation-embrittlement, void
swelling, irradiation growth and creep, fracture toughness etc.
CHE G565 Radiation and Radio Isotopes Applications 4
Nuclear non-power research reactors, measurement of radiation
and use of neutron radiography, neutron diffraction and activa-
tion analysis for materials characterization; Production of Radioi-
sotopes and their applications in medicine and healthcare, food
and agriculture including food irradiation & preservation, radia-
tion induced mutation for seed and crop, sterilization and appli-
cation of radioactive tracers in basic and applied research.
CHE G566 Nuclear Safety, Security and Safeguards 4
Radiation interaction & safety, environmental aspects, internal
and external dose evaluation, reactor effluents and release of
radioactivity, Operational and maintenance safety, Hazop and
Hazan analysis, HSE issues and systems management in Nu-
clear installations and Nuclear industry and Nuclear Laborato-
ries, Design basis threat (DBT) and threat analysis and evalua-
tion, Detection, delay and response technologies and evaluation,
Incorporating insider threat/wrong operation in DBT, Security
and safety in Nuclear Materials Transportation, Nuclear foren-
sics and consequence management, Nuclear systems safety
and security analysis, Technologies and techniques for securing
nuclear materials, Nuclear materials safeguard systems from
theft, spillage and other unforeseen incidents, Fuel facility safe-
guard systems, Design of safeguard systems, Intrinsic and Ex-
trinsic safeguard and proliferation resistance of fissile and fertile
materials, Technical issues associated with Nuclear Non Prolif-
eration, Facility inspection, safety, security and safeguard audit,
Elements of non-proliferation policies, treaties and enforcement
technologies.
CHE G567 Natural Gas Processing 4
Overview of Natural Gas industry; Overview of Gas Plant pro-
cessing; Field operation and inlet receiving; Compression; Gas
treating; Gas dehydration; Hydrocarbon recovery; Nitrogen re-
jection; Trace component recovery or removal; Liquids pro-
cessing; Sulfur recovery; Transportation and storage; Liquefied
Natural Gas; Capital cost of Gas processing facilities; Natural
gas processing plants.
CHE G568 Modeling and Simulation in Petroleum Re-4
fining
Introduction to modeling and simulation; Numerical methods and
software; Modeling and simulation of multi-component distillation
columns; Reactor modeling in the petroleum refining industry;
Modeling of catalytic hydro-treating; Modeling of catalytic reform-
ing; Modeling and simulation of fluidized-bed catalytic cracking
converters.
CHE G569 Petroleum Production Economics 4
Cash flow analysis in the petroleum industry (definition of cash
flow, deriving net cash flow under tax/royalty systems and pro-
duction sharing contracts, depreciation methods, inflation, sunk
costs). Economic indicators (net present value, rate of return and
other indicators). Fiscal analysis (the nature of petroleum fiscal
regimes, the effects of fiscal regimes on exploration and field
development decision making, economic analysis of fiscal re-
gimes in India & abroad).
I-31
CHE G611 Computer Aided Analysis and Design 2 3 5
The course aims at developing complete self reliance in solving
analysis & design problems of engineering with the aid of com-
puters. It stresses upon the use of more powerful tools including
system planning, simulation and modelling. The student will take
up a design project and will work independently on the project
guided by the instructor or resource person as and when re-
quired. The effort must culminate with a CAAD program and a
project report.
CHE G613 Advanced Mass Transfer 3 2 5
Use of stage and differential contact concepts in design of mass
transfer equipment; methods of determining and interpretation of
rate data; multicomponent distillation, absorption and extraction.
CHE G614 Advanced Heat Transfer 3 2 5
Heat conduction with unsteady boundary conditions; recent ad-
vances in natural and forced convection; condensation and boil-
ing phenomena; heat transfer in high speed flows; liquid metal
heat transfer, radioactive metal heat-transfer between surfaces
in absorbing media; complex problems involving simultaneous
conduction, convection and radiation.
CHE G615 Advanced Separation Processes 3 2 5
Shortcut and rigorous methods of conventional separation pro-
cesses such as multicomponent distillation, absorption, stripping
and extraction; Azeotropic and Extractive distillation; adsorption
based separation, simulated moving bed adsorption, thermally
coupled pressure swing adsorption; cryogenic separation, gas
liquefaction; membrane based separation, pervaporation, liquid
membrane; biotechnology based separation, modeling ap-
proach, design considerations, biofiltration; reactive distillation;
super critical fluid extraction.
CHE G616 Petroleum Reservoir Engineering 3 2 5
Origin and composition of petroleum; Geographic distribution of
oil; Petroleum geology; Exploration, drilling and recovery; Drilling
methods and drilling fluids; Lubricants and spotting fluids; Corro-
sion control; Analytical and test methods; Enhanced oil recovery;
Injection fluids; Polymer and caustic flooding; Use of surfactants;
Improvement of oil displacement efficiency; Environmental and
economic aspects.
CHE G617 Petroleum Refinery Engineering 3 2 5
History and development of refining; Indian petroleum industry;
Composition of petroleum, laboratory tests, refinery products;
Classification, characterization and evaluation of crude oil;
Trends of petroleum products; Atmospheric and vacuum distilla-
tion; Design of crude distillation column; Catalytic cracking; Hy-
drotreating and Hydrocracking; Catalytic reforming; Delayed cok-
ing and visbreaking; Furnace design; Isomerization, alkylation
and polymerization; Lube oil manufacturing; Energy conserva-
tion in petroleum refineries; Environmental aspects of refining.
CHE G618 Petroleum Downstream Processing 3 2 5
Petrochemical feedstock; Pyrolysis of Naptha and light hydro-
carbons; First generation petrochemicals: Ethylene, Propylene,
Butylenes, Acetylene, Butadienes, Chloroprene, cyclohexane,
BTX, Polymethyl Benzenes; Second generation petrochemicals:
synthesis gas, methanol, ethanol, ethylene oxide, propylene ox-
ide, acetone, allyl alcohol, glycerol, acrylonitrile, Acrylic acid and
derivatives, phenol, aniline, nylon monomers, polyester mono-
mers, styrene and other monomers; Third generation petro-
chemicals: plastics, rubbers, fibres, resins, detergents, pesti-
cides, dyes, protein, explosives, petroleum coke and carbon
black; Catalysts in petroleum refining and petrochemicals pro-
cesses; Transportation of dangerous goods; Health and safety in
petrochemical industries; Pollution and toxicity; Future of petro-
chemicals.
CHE G619 Process Intensification 3 2 5
A brief review of the process intensification (PI), includes philos-
ophy and principles of PI; equipments and methods for PI; few
examples of their application on the commercial scale, such as
multifunctional reactors, hybrid processes, monolithic reactors,
high gravity reactors etc., industrial practice of PI- methodology
and applications; PI by process synthesis; PI by plant safety.
This course will terminate with several design projects on real
life problems.
VI
CHE G620 Energy Integration Analysis 3 2 5
Importance and scope of application of Energy Integration; Pinch
technology tools, targeting, design, synthesis and optimization of
heat exchanger networks (HEN); Interfacing HEN synthesis with
heat exchanger design, Retrofitting, energy integration of distilla-
tion and evaporation processes, mathematical programming ap-
proach, Artificial intelligence based approaches.
CHE G621 Fluid Dynamics 2 3 5
Mechanics of turbulent flow; semi-empirical expressions; statisti-
cal concepts; stability theory;flow of non-Newtonian fluids; sta-
tionary and moving shock waves; Prandtl-Mayer expressions;
two and three dimensional subsonic and supersonic flow; meth-
ods of characteristics; small perturbation theory and similarity
rules.
CHE G622 Advanced Chemical Engineering Thermo-3 2 5
dynamics
Review of fundamental principles; statistical foundations; ther-
modynamic properties of pure substances and mixtures, their
estimation and correlation; stability and equilibrium criteria for
homogeneous and heterogeneous systems; thermodynamics of
irreversible processes.
CHE G641 Reaction Engineering 3 2 5
Design of multi-phase reactors; analyses of gas-liquid and gas-
liquid-solid reactions; intrinsic kinetics of catalytic reactions; resi-
dence time distribution models for micro-and macro-mixing;
mathematical models for gas-liquid-solid reactors; laboratory re-
actors; dynamics and design of various multi-phase reactors
such as trickle bed reactors, bubble column reactors, segment-
ed-bed reactors, slurry reactors, spouted bed reactors, pulsating
reactors, fluidized bed reactors, etc.; optimization of chemical
reactors.
Chemistry
CHEM D101 Principles of Chemistry 3 0 3
States of matter; Elements, compounds, mixtures; Physical and
chemical changes; Stoichiometry; Mole concept; Calculations of
yield; Atomic and molecular masses; Molecular and empirical
formula; oxidation and reduction reactions; Bohr’s model of the
atom; Electronic quantum numbers; s, p, d, f orbitals; Electron
spin; Electronic configurations; Periodic table; Periodic trends in
atomic and ionic radii, ionization energies; Electron Affinity;
Chemical Bonding: Lewis octet rule; Ionic and covalent bonding;
Electronegativity; Molecular shapes; VSEPR model; Hybrid or-
bitals; Multiple bonds; Representative main group chemistry;
Ideal Gas law; Partial pressures; Kinetic molecular theory of
gases; Real gases; Reaction rates; Order of reactions; half-life;
Temperature and rate; Catalysis; Work, heat, internal energy,
enthalpy, first law; State functions; Hess’s law; Enthalpy of for-
mation; Entropy; Second law; Free energy and equilibrium; Equi-
librium Constants (Kc and Kp); Le Chatelier’s principle; Solubility
and saturation; Concentrations – mole fractions, molality, molari-
ty; Aqueous solutions: Acids, bases, salts; BrÖnsted and Lewis
definitions, Ka and Kb; pH; Strong and weak acids and bases;
Buffers; Electrochemistry: Nernst Equation; Electrochemical
Cells, batteries; Organic Compounds’ IUPAC nomenclature; In-
ductive, electromeric, resonance and hyper conjugation effects;
Free radicals, carbocations, carbanions, electrophiles and nu-
cleophiles, types of organic reactions.
CHEM F110 Chemistry Laboratory 0 2 1
This laboratory course consists of experiments based on funda-
mental principles and techniques of chemistry emphasizing on
physical-chemical measurements, quantitative & qualitative
analysis and preparations.
CHEM F111 General Chemistry 3 0 3
Principles of thermodynamics, phase and chemical equilibrium,
electrochemistry, kinetics; Atomic structure, chemical bonding,
solid state and structural chemistry, molecular spectroscopy; or-
ganic compounds, functional groups, structure and isomerism,
stereochemistry, reactions and mechanisms, aromaticity, coor-
dination chemistry, chemistry of representative elements.
CHEM F211 Physical Chemistry I 3 0 3
Kinetic - molecular theory of gases; perfect gas; pressure and
I-32
temperature; Maxwell distribution; collisions, effusion, mean free
path; Boltzmann distribution law and heat capacities; first law of
thermodynamics; p-V work , internal energy, enthalpy; Joule-
Thomson experiment; second law; heat engines, cycles; entro-
py; thermodynamic temperature scale; material equilibrium;
Gibbs energy; chemical potential; phase equilibrium; reaction
equilibrium; standard states, enthalpies; Temperature depend-
ence of reaction heats; third law; estimation of thermodynamic
properties; perfect gas reaction equilibrium; temperature de-
pendence; one component phase equilibrium, Clapeyron equa-
tion; real gases, critical state, corresponding states; solutions,
partial molar quantities, ideal and non-ideal solutions, activity
coefficients, Debye-Huckel theory; standard state properties of
solution components; Reaction equilibrium in non-ideal solu-
tions, weak acids-buffers, coupled reactions; multi component
phase equilibrium- colligative properties, two and three compo-
nent systems, solubility; electrochemical systems- thermody-
namics of electrochemical systems and galvanic cells, standard
electrode potentials, concentration cells, liquid junction, ion se-
lective electrodes, double layer, dipole moments and polariza-
tions, applications in biology, concept of overvoltage.
CHEM F212 Organic Chemistry I 3 0 3
Basic terminology and representation of organic reactions; ther-
modynamics and kinetics of reactions; reactive intermediates
(carbocations, carbanions, free radicals, nitrenes carbenes); ar-
omatic chemistry; properties, preparation and reactions of alkyl
halides, alcohols, ethers, amines and nitro compounds; carbonyl
compounds; carboxylic acid and derivatives; carbohydrates.
CHEM F213 Physical Chemistry II 3 0 3
Origin of quantum theory - black body radiation, line spectra,
photoelectric effect; wave particle duality; wave equation: normal
modes, superposition; postulates of quantum mechanics, time
dependence, Hermitian operators, commutator; Schrödinger
equation - operators, observables, solution for particle in a box,
normalization, variance, momentum; harmonic oscillator, vibra-
tional spectroscopy; rigid rotor, angular momentum, rotational
spectroscopy; Hydrogen atom - orbitals, effect of magnetic field;
Variation method - variation theorem, secular determinants;
Many electron atoms and molecules; Born Oppenheimer approx-
imation, VB Theory, H2 in VB, Coulomb, exchange, overlap in-
tegrals states of H2; antisymmetric wavefunctions – two electron
systems, Slater determinants, HF method; SCF method; term
symbols and spectra - configuration, state, Hund’s rules, atomic
spectra, spin orbit interaction; basic MO theory, homonuclear di-
atomics - N2, O2, SCF-LCAO-MO, molecular term symbols;
HMO theory - π electron approximation, conjugated, cyclic sys-
tems.
CHEM F214 Inorganic Chemistry I 3 0 3
Structure of molecules: VSEPR model; ionic crystal structure,
structure of complex solids; concepts of inorganic chemistry:
electronegativity, acid-base chemistry, chemistry of aqueous and
non-aqueous solvents; descriptive chemistry of some elements:
periodicity, chemistry of transition metals, halogens and noble
gases; inorganic chains, rings, cages and clusters.
CHEM F223 Colloid and Surface Chemistry 3 0 3
Surface phenomena; intermolecular forces relevant to colloidal
systems; forces in colloidal systems; experimental and theoreti-
cal studies of the structure, dynamics and phase transitions in
micelles, membranes, monolayers, bilayers, vesicles and related
systems; technical applications.
CHEM F241 Inorganic Chemistry II 3 0 3
Coordination Chemistry: Bonding - Valence Bond, Crystal Field,
and Molecular Orbital theories; Complexes - nomenclature,
isomerism, coordination numbers, structure, electronic spectra,
magnetic properties, chelate effect; Reactions - nucleophilic
substitution reactions, kinetics, mechanisms; descriptive chemis-
try of Lanthanides and Actinides; Organometallic Chemistry:
structure and reaction of metal carbonyls, nitrosyls, dinitrogens,
alkyls, carbenes, carbynes, carbides, alkenes, alkynes, and me-
tallocenes; catalysis by organometallic compounds; stereochem-
ically non-rigid molecules.
CHEM F242 Chemical Experimentation I 0 3 3
VI
This course is based on laboratory experiments in the field of or-
ganic chemistry. Qualitative organic analysis including prelimi-
nary examination, detection of functional groups, preparation
and recrystallization of derivatives, separation and identification
of the two component mixtures using chemical and physical
methods; quantitative analysis such as determination of the per-
centage/ number of hydroxyl groups in organic compounds by
acetylation method, estimation of amines/ phenols using bro-
mate-bromide solution/ acetylation method, determination of io-
dine and saponification values of an oil sample; single step syn-
thesis such as benzaldehyde to cinnamic acid; multistep synthe-
sis such as phthallic anhydride – phthallimide – anthranillic acid ;
extraction of organic compounds from natural sources: isolation
of caffeine from tea leaves, casein from milk, lactose from milk,
lycopene from tomatoes, β- carotene from carrots etc.; demon-
stration on the use of software such as Chem Draw, Chem-
Sketch or ISI-Draw.
CHEM F243 Organic Chemistry II 3 0 3
Introduction to stereoisomers; symmetry elements; configuration;
chirality in molecules devoid of chiral centers (allenes, alkyli-
denecycloalkanes, spiranes, biphenyl); atropisomerism; stereo-
chemistry of alkenes; conformation of acyclic molecules; con-
formations of cyclic molecules; reaction mechanisms; asymmet-
ric synthesis; photochemistry and pericyclic reactions.
CHEM F244 Physical Chemistry III 3 0 3
Symmetry: symmetry operations, point groups, reducible and ir-
reducible representations, character tables, SALC, degeneracy,
vibrational modes IR-Raman activity identification; matrix evalua-
tion of operators; stationary state perturbation theory; time de-
pendent perturbation theory; virial and Hellmann-Feynmann the-
orems; polyatomic molecules: SCF MO treatment, basis sets,
population analysis, molecular electrostatic potentials, localized
MOs; VB method; configuration interaction, Moller Plesset per-
turbation theory; semi empirical methods-all valence electron
methods: CNDO,INDO, NDDO; Density Functional Theory: Ho-
henberg-Kohn theorems, Kohn-Sham self consistent field ap-
proach, exchange correlation functional; molecular mechanics.
CHEM F266 Study Project 3
These courses include projects which are oriented towards read-
ings from published literature or books about new frontiers of
development or analysis of available database. These courses
are normally available to students in second or higher levels.
These courses must coterminate with project reports.
CHEM F311 Organic Chemistry III 3 0 3
Applications of important reagents and reactions in organic syn-
thesis and disconnection or synthon approach will be empha-
sized in this course. Basic principles of disconnection, order of
events, chemioselectivity, regioselectivity etc. Common organic
reagents, Organometallic reagents, Transition metal catalyzed
reactions, introduction to reterosynthetic analysis using one
group C-X and C-C disconnections, two group C-X and C-C dis-
connections, ring synthesis (saturated heterocycles), synthesis
of heterocyclic compounds and complex molecules.
CHEM F312 Physical Chemistry IV 3 0 3
Weak forces; surface chemistry: interphase region, thermody-
namics, surface films on liquids, adsorption of gases on solids,
colloids, micelles, and reverse micellar structures; transport pro-
cesses: kinetics, thermal conductivity, viscosity, diffusion, sedi-
mentation; electrical conductivity in metals and in solutions; re-
action kinetics, measurement of rates; integrated rate laws; rate
laws and equilibrium constants for elementary reactions; reac-
tion mechanisms; temperature dependence of rate constants;
rate constants and equilibrium constants; rate law in non ideal
systems; uni, bi and tri molecular reactions, chain reactions,
free-radical polymerizations; fast reactions; reactions in solu-
tions; heterogeneous and enzyme catalysis; introduction to sta-
tistical thermodynamics; theories of reaction rates; molecular re-
action dynamics.
CHEM F313 Instrumental Methods of Analysis 3 1 4
Principles and practice of modern instrumental methods of
chemical analysis. Emphasis on spectroscopic techniques such
as UV-Visible, infrared, NMR (1H, 13C and other elements,
NOE, correlation spectroscopies), ESR, atomic absorption and
I-33
emission, photoelectron, Mössbauer, and fluorescence. Other
topics will include mass spectrometry, separation techniques,
light scattering, electroanalytical methods, thermal analysis, and
diffraction methods.
CHEM F320 Introductory Computational Chemistry 0 4 2
Laboratory
In this course the major focus is on practical computation of
electronic structure of atoms and molecules using open source
and proprietary software; specific computational experiments will
be in the areas of potential energy surfaces, geometry optimiza-
tion, molecular geometry from symmetry and trigonometric rela-
tions without visualization software, molecular orbitals and bond-
ing patterns, Hartree-Fock calculations, correlation energy and
size-consistency, DFT based calculations, computing excited
states using CIS, EOM-CCSD jobs for computing energies of
excited, ionized and electron-attached states; methods to esti-
mate activation energy, solvent effects etc.; molecular dynamics
simulation, molecular mechanics will also be explored; the actual
experiments may vary and can have more specific learning out-
comes so as to enhance the course with the latest developments
in electronic structure theories of chemistry.
CHEM F323 Biophysical Chemistry 3 0 3
The principles governing the molecular shapes, structures, struc-
tural transitions and dynamics in some important classes of bio-
molecules and biomolecular aggregates will be discussed. The
topics will include: structure, conformational analysis, conforma-
tional transitions and equilibria in proteins and nucleic acids; pro-
tein folding; lipids - monolayers,bilayers and micelles; lipid-
protein interactions in membranes.
CHEM F324 Numerical Methods in Chemistry 3 3 4
Selected problems in chemistry from diverse areas such as
chemical kinetics and dynamics, quantum mechanics, electronic
structure of molecules, spectroscopy, molecular mechanics and
conformational analysis, thermodynamics, and structure and
properties of condensed phases will be discussed. The problems
chosen will illustrate the application of various mathematical and
numerical methods such as those used in the solution of sys-
tems of algebraic equations, differential equations, and minimi-
zation of multidimensional functions, Fourier transform and Mon-
te Carlo methods.
CHEM F325 Polymer Chemistry 3 0 3
Types of polymers; structures of polymers; molecular weight and
molecular weight distributions; kinetics and mechanisms of ma-
jor classes of polymerization reactions such as step growth, rad-
ical, ionic, heterogeneous, and copolymerization methods; poly-
mer solutions- solubility, lattice model and the Flory- Huggins
theory, solution viscosity; bulk properties- thermal and mechani-
cal properties such as the melting and glass transitions, rubber
elasticity, and viscous flow; polymerization reactions used in in-
dustry.
CHEM F326 Solid State Chemistry 3 0 3
X-ray diffraction; point groups, space groups and crystal struc-
ture; descriptive crystal chemistry; factors which influence crystal
structure; crystal defects and non-stoichiometry; solid solutions;
interpretation of the phase diagrams; phase transitions; ionic
conductivity and solid electrolytes; electronic properties and
band theory; magnetic properties; optical properties; analysis of
single crystal XRD data; preparation of solid state materials and
the chemistry of device fabrication.
CHEM F327 Electrochemistry: Fundamentals and Ap- 3 0 3
plications
Electrode Processes: Overpotential, Faradaic and non-Faradaic
processes, the ideal polarized electrode, capacitance and
charge of an electrode, electrical double layer; primary and sec-
ondary cells, variables in electrochemical cells, factors affecting
electrode reaction, cell resistance; Mass transfer: steady-state
mass transfer, semiempirical treatment of the transient re-
sponse, coupled reversible and irreversible reactions, reference
electrodes; Kinetics of electrode reactions: Arrhenius equation
and potential energy surfaces, equilibrium conditions, Tafel
Plots; rate determining electron transfer, Nernstian, quasi-
reversible, and irreversible multistep processes; Marcus Theory;
mass transfer by migration and diffusion; basic potential step
VI
methods; Ultramicroelectrodes (UME) potential sweep methods;
polarography and pulse voltammetry; controlled current tech-
niques; impedance; bulk and flow electrolysis; electrochemical
instrumentation; scanning probe techniques, STM, AFM, Scan-
ning Electrochemical Microscopy, approach curves, imaging sur-
face topography and reactivity, potentiometric tips, applications.
CHEM F328 Supramolecular Chemistry 3 0 3
Non-covalent interactions and their role in “supermolecules” and
organized polymolecular systems; concepts of molecular recog-
nition, information and complementarity; molecular receptors:
design principles, binding and recognition of neutral molecules
and anionic substrates, coreceptor molecules and multiple
recognition, linear recognition of molecular lengths by ditopic co-
receptors, heterotopic coreceptors, amphiphilic receptors, large
molecular cages; supramolecular dynamics; supramolecular ca-
talysis: reactive macrocyclic cation and anion receptor mole-
cules, cyclophane type receptor, metallocatalysis, catalysis of
synthetic reactions, biomolecular and abiotic catalysis, hetero-
geneous catalysis; transport processes and carrier design: cati-
on and anion carriers, electron, proton and light coupled
transport processes, transfer via transmembrane channels; su-
pramolecular assemblies: heterogeneous molecular recognition,
supramolecular solids, molecular recognition at surfaces, molec-
ular and supramolecular morphogenesis; supramolecular photo-
chemistry: photonic devices, light conversion and energy trans-
fer devices, photosensitive molecular receptors, photoinduced
electron transfer and reactions, non-linear optical properties; su-
pramolecular electrochemistry: electronic devices, molecular
wires, polarized molecular wires, switchable molecular wires,
molecular magnetic devices; ionic devices, tubular mesophases,
ion-responsive monolayers, molecular protonics, ion and molec-
ular sensors, switching devices and signals, photoswitching and
electroswitching devices, switching of ionic and molecular pro-
cesses, mechanical switching processes; self-assembly: inor-
ganic architectures, organic structures by hydrogen bonding;
helical metal complexes, supramolecular arrays of metal ions –
racks, ladders and grids, molecular recognition directed self-
assembly of organized phases; supramolecular polymers; or-
dered solid-state structures; supramolecular synthesis, assis-
tance, replication; supramolecular chirality; supramolecular ma-
terials.
CHEM F329 Analytical Chemistry 3 1 4
Data handling; sample preparation; unit operations; volumetric
and gravimetric analysis; chromatography; solvent and solid
phase extraction; absorption and emission techniques; potenti-
ometry, voltammetry; trace metal separation and estimation in
biological and environmental samples with emphasis on green
chemistry, sensors; laboratory training in some of these tech-
niques.
CHEM F330 Photophysical Chemistry 3 1 4
Absorption of the electromagnetic radiation; photophysical pro-
cesses such as fluorescence, phosphorescence, non-radiative
transitions, and delayed luminescence, excimer and exciplex
formation; triplet state: radiative and non-radiative transitions;
energy transfer, fluorescence resonance energy transfer
(FRET), quenching of fluorescence; fluorescence decay; protein
and DNA fluorescence; time-resolved emission spectra (TRES);
time-dependent anisotropy decays; application of photophysics
for the characterization of biological and bio-mimicking systems.
In addition to the theory, through simple experiments, laboratory
training will be imparted.
CHEM F333 Chemistry of Materials 3 0 3
Solid state structure : unit cells, metallic crystal structures, poly-
morphism and allotropy, crystallographic direction and planes,
closed packed crystal structures, polycrystalline materials, ani-
sotropy; meso and micro porous materials: zeolites, composites,
synthesis, characterization (XRD, SEM, TEM, AFM, FTIR, NMR,
TGA, and DTA) and applications; ceramics and glass materials:
crystalline and non-crystalline nature, glass-ceramics, pro-
cessing; polymers: synthesis, structure, properties, inorganic
polymers; mechanical properties: stress and strain, elastic and
tensile properties, hardness, phase transformations, microstruc-
ture, alteration of mechanical properties; magnetic properties:
atomic magnetism in solids, the exchange interaction, classifica-
tion of magnetic materials, diamagnetism, pauli paramagnetism,
I-34
ferromagnetism, antiferromagnetism, ferrimagnetism, superpar-
amagnetism, ferromagnetic domains, hysteresis loop, hard and
soft ferrites, applications; electrical properties: conductivity, band
theory, types of semiconductors, time dependence of conductivi-
ty, mobility of charge carriers, metal-metal junction, metal–
semiconductor junction, n-type and p-type semiconductors; opti-
cal properties: refraction, reflection, absorption, transmission,
luminescence, photoconductivity, opacity and translucency in in-
sulators, optical fibers; thermal properties: heat capacity, thermal
expansion, conductivity, thermal stresses; corrosion: electro-
chemistry of corrosion of metals, different forms, environmental
effects, prevention.
CHEM F334 Magnetic Resonance 3 0 3
Classical treatment of motion of isolated spins; quantum me-
chanical description of spin in static and alternating magnetic
fields; Bloch equations; spin echoes; transient and steady state
responses; absorption and dispersion; magnetic dipolar broad-
ening; formal theory of chemical shifts; Knight shift; second order
spin effects; spin-lattice relaxation; spin temperature; density
matrix; Bloch-Wangsness-Redfield theory; adiabatic and sudden
changes; saturation; spin locking; double resonance; Overhau-
ser effect; ENDOR; pulsed magnetic resonance: Carr-Purcell
sequence, phase alternation, spin-flip narrowing, real pulses;
electric quadrupole effects; spin-spin coupling; 2D correlation
spectroscopies: COSY, DQF, INADEQUATE experiments;
CIDNP; electron paramagnetic resonance (EPR); nuclear quad-
rupolar resonance; muon spin resonance; magnetic resonance
imaging.
CHEM F335 Organic Chemistry and Drug Design 3 0 3
An introduction to organic chemistry principles and reactivities vi-
tal to drug design, drug development and drug action; the role of
molecular size, shape, and charge, and in drug action; proteins
and nucleic acids as drug targets; bioisosterism; ADME, QSAR
and drug design; applied molecular modeling and combinatorial
synthesis; Synthesis of some selected chemotherapeutic agents
(e.g antifungal, antibacterial, antimalarial, anticancer etc.)
CHEM F336 Nanochemistry 3 1 4
Nano and nature, importance of nanoscience, chemistry behind
nano; instruments for characterizing nanomaterials; diversity in
nanosystems: chemical aspects of metallic, magnetic and semi-
conducting nanomaterials, carbon nanotubes and fullerenes,
self-assembled monolayers, monolayer protected metal nano-
materials, core-shell nanomaterials; applications of nano materi-
als in nanobiology, nanosensors and nanomedicine; hands on
experience in laboratory.
CHEM F337 Green Chemistry and Catalysis 3 0 3
Definition and overview of the twelve principles of Green Chem-
istry, alternative starting materials; alternative synthesis and re-
agents; E factor and the concept of atom economy; the role of
catalysis, alternate energy sources (microwave & ultrasound),
catalysis by solid acids and bases, bio-catalysis, catalytic reduc-
tion, catalytic oxidation, catalytic C–C bond formation, cascade
catalysis, enantioselective catalysis, alternative reaction media,
renewable raw materials, industrial applications of catalysis.
CHEM F341 Chemical Experimentation II 0 4 4
This course is based on laboratory experiments in the fields of
inorganic, physical and analytical chemistry. Quantitative sepa-
ration and determination of pairs of metal ions using gravimetric
and volumetric methods; Ion exchange chromatography; Sepa-
ration & estimation of metal ions using ion exchangers and sol-
vent extraction techniques; Determination of Keq of M – L sys-
tems by colorimetry; Preparation, purification and structural stud-
ies (magnetic, electronic and IR) of inorganic complex com-
pounds; Physical property measurements such as conductance,
pH, viscosity, surface tension, refractive index, specific rotation
etc. Experiments to illustrate the principles of thermodynamics,
kinetics, chemical equilibrium, phase equilibrium, electrochemis-
try, adsorption, etc.
CHEM F342 Organic Chemistry IV 3 0 3
The fundamental structural characteristics, synthesis and reac-
tion of various heterocyclic compounds, natural products and bi-
omolecules will be emphasized in this course. Structure, nomen-
clature and common reactions of heterocyclic compounds; syn-
VI
thesis, properties and reactions of three-, four-, five-, and six
membered ring systems; condensed five and six membered ring
systems, introduction to natural products; terpenoids, steroids,
lipids, alkaloids, amino acids, peptides, proteins and vitamins.
CHEM F343 Inorganic Chemistry III 3 0 3
Inorganic elements in biological systems: role of alkali and alka-
line earth metal ions, iron, copper and molybdenum; metalloen-
zymes. Metals in medicine: metal deficiency and disease; toxici-
ty of mercury, cadmium, lead, beryllium, selenium and arsenic;
biological defence mechanisms and chelation therapy. Molecular
magnetic materials: trinuclear and high nuclearity compounds;
magnetic chain compounds; magnetic long-range ordering in
molecular compounds; design of molecular magnets. Other
emerging topics in inorganic chemistry.
CHEM F366 Lab Project 3
CHEM F367 Lab Project 3
These courses include projects involving laboratory investigation
or laboratory development in the students discipline or interdis-
ciplinary areas. These courses are normally available to stu-
dents in third or higher levels. These courses must coterminate
with project reports.
CHEM F376 Design Project 3
CHEM F377 Design Project 3
These courses are intended to impart training in design of prod-
uct/ process or other artifact to the students in the discipline or
interdisciplinary areas. These courses are normally available to
students in third or higher levels. These courses must cotermi-
nate with project reports.
CHEM F412 Photochemistry and Laser Spectroscopy 3 0 3
Photochemical events : absorption, fluorescence and phospho-
rescence; Jablonski diagrams; physical properties of molecules
after photoexcitation; photochemical tools and techniques: spec-
trophotometers, fluorescence decay time measurement and
analysis, flash photolysis; fundamental properties of laser light;
principles of laser operation ; description of some specific laser
systems : Helium-Neon, Argon ion, CO2, Nd-YAG and ultrafast
Titanium : Sapphire lasers.
CHEM F413 Electron Correlation in Atoms and Mole-3 1 4
cules
Matrix algebra, Matrix representation of operators; mean-field
approach: the Hartree-Fock method- formulation, coulomb and
exchange integrals, Fock-operator, second quantization, Slater
rules, self-consistency, correlation energy; Brillouin's theorem,
Koopmans' theorem; basis-sets, restricted Hartree-Fock,
Roothan-Hall equations; unrestricted Hartree-Fock method, spin-
contamination; restricted open-shell Hartree-Fock method; Re-
covery of correlation energy time independent perturbation ap-
proach: Brillouin-Wigner and Rayleigh-Schrodinger perturbation
theories; Møller Plesset and Epstein-Nesbeth partitioning of mo-
lecular Hamiltonion, many-body perturbation theory; Feynman
diagrams, connected and disconnected terms, size-consistency;
Recovery of correlation energy: configuration interaction and
other non-perturbative approaches, variational and projection
approaches for obtaining CI anasatz, truncated CI and size-
consistency problem, Davidson correction, pair-coupled-pair
theory, coupled-electron-pair method and coupled-cluster ap-
proach; Density functional theory, N-representability, V-
representability, Kohn-Sham approach, natural orbitals, ex-
change-correlation functionals, Levy functional.
CHEM F414 Bio and Chemical Sensors 3 0 3
Biological and chemical recognition: reaction kinetics, signals
and noise, sensitivity, specificity, selectivity; IUPAC definition of
biosensors, their classification based on receptors and trans-
ducers; analytical characteristics of various types of bio and
chemical sensors, performance criteria of biosensors; electro-
chemical, optical, thermal, piezoelectric transducer selections for
immunosensors and enzyme sensors; sufrace functionaliazaiton
of transducers, novel self assembly techniques, coupling of bio-
molecules on different surfaces and their characterization; ther-
mal biosensors, enzyme thermistor; miniaturization of sensors
and flow injection techniques; applications in analysis such as
urea, penicillin, pesticides, cholesterol; optical biosensor mecha-
I-35
nisms: fluorescence and chemiluminescence techniques; elec-
trochemical biosensors: impedimetric and amperometric biosen-
sors; electrochemical quartz crystal micro balance, applications
in chemical and biological analysis; flow injection systems vs.
static measurements, protein-protein interaction and quantifica-
tion; principle of inhibition based biosensor for enzyme and im-
munoassay, pretreatment techniques in bio-analysis.
CHEM F415 Frontiers in Organic Synthesis 3 0 3
Traditional and classic organic synthesis; modern synthetic
strategies; systematic approach in terms of progress in reaction
methodologies in synthesizing complex natural molecules; met-
al-catalyzed C-C and C-X couplings; direct functionalization via
C-H and C-C activation; development of organocatalysis: metal-
free catalysis; direct functionalization of olefins including hy-
droamination, hydrogenation, hydrosilylation, hydroformylation
and other C-C bond forming reactions; the potential of radical
chemistry for C-C and C-X bond formation; metal-catalyzed car-
bocyclization: from Ru and Rh-mediated cycloadditions to Pt and
Au chemistry; one-pot multi-steps reactions: avoiding time and
resource-consuming isolation procedures; tracing the develop-
ment from the first total synthesis to the state of the art for some
complex molecules.
CHEM F416 Applied Crystallography 3 0 3
Symmetry operations; space groups; X-ray diffraction; crystal
nucleation and growth; single crystal; structure determination of
a single crystal; crystal engineering; co-crystal and engineering;
crystallographic databases.
CHEM F422 Statistical Thermodynamics 3 0 3
Review of classical thermodynamics, principles of statistical
thermodynamics, ensemble averages; Boltzmann distribution;
partition functions and thermodynamic quantities; ideal gases
and crystals; thermodynamic properties from spectroscopic and
structural data; dense gases and the second virial coefficient;
statistical mechanics of solutions; Bose-Einstein and Fermi-Dirac
statistics.
CHEM F423 Astrochemistry 3 0 3
The molecular universe; Starlight, galaxies, and clusters; Atomic
and molecular astronomy, review of quantum chemistry and mo-
lecular spectroscopy; Stellar chemistry; Interstellar medium; Me-
teorite and comet chemistry; Cosmic-ray astrochemistry; Plane-
tary chemistry of Venus, Mars, Titan, and other interesting plan-
ets and their satellites; Prebiotic chemistry; Primitive life forms.
CHEM F430 Atmospheric Chemistry 3 0 3
This course aims to describe the chemical and physical pro-
cesses of atmosphere by different models. The specific topics
will include, the measures of atmospheric compositions, atmos-
pheric pressure, models to explain variation in concentration of
chemical species in atmosphere, atmospheric transport, continu-
ity equation to provide quantitative measures about the variation
of concentration, geochemical cycles, the green-house effect,
aerosols, atmospheric chemical kinetics, stratospheric ozone,
oxidation in troposphere, ozone air pollution, and acid rain.
CHEM F431Sustainable Chemistry using Renewables 3 0 3
mportance of the utilization of renewable resources as alterna-
tive feedstock for the chemicals and fuels industry; alternatives
to current petro-based technology and processes such as bio-
mass utilization; chemicals from renewables, bio-refinery con-
cept, strategies for biomass utilization, Platform molecules, De-
graded molecules, Biomass conversions by new catalytic/ syn-
thetic routes, catalytic cascade reactions, one-pot multi-product
synthesis; chemistry in lignocellulose conversions; bio-based
oleochemicals; fine chemicals from renewables; thermo-
chemical conversion to fuels and other chemicals; analyticals in
thermal biomass conversions, kinetics based on tunable diode
laser measurements, CFD modeling; bio-ethanol : production,
upgradation and valorization; glycerol as feedstock; fatty acid
epoxidation; hydrogen and carbon-di-oxide, hydrogen as a feed-
stock, electro-catalysis, solar-photo catalysis, fuel cells, Carbon-
di-oxide capture and valorization.
CHEM F491 Special Project 3
This is an unstructured open-ended course where under the
overall supervision of an instructor-in-charge, batches of stu-
VI
dents will be attached to different instructors. Each batch will
work on a specific time-bound project which is of basic or pe-
ripheral concern of his discipline. Each student must submit a
project report as a culmination of his endeavour and investiga-
tion. The instructor- in-charge will determine the choice of the
project and also whether or not the project report is to be submit-
ted jointly by a group or individually by a student. The course will
aim to evaluate student's actual ability to use the fundamentals
of knowledge and to meet new unknown situations as demon-
strated by the students' interaction with the instructors and in-
structor-in- charge and aggregated in the project report. The in-
structor-in- charge may assign specific hours for formal brain-
storming sessions.
CHEM G511 Nuclear and Radio Chemistry 5
Course description is to be developed.
CHEM G513 Advanced Nuclear and Radio- 5
chemistry
Nuclear stability, binding energy, properties of nucleons; Nuclear
models (Shell Model, Liquid drop model), Radioactive decay
characteristics, decay kinetics, α, β and γ decay, nuclear reac-
tions, types, radiative capture, reaction cross section, theory of
fission; Nuclear reactors – classification, Reactor power, Breeder
reactors, Nuclear reactors in India, Reprocessing of spent fuel,
Nuclear waste management (HLW, LLW and ILW); Detection
and measurement of activity, GM counters, Gamma counters,
Liquid Scintillation counting; Application of radioactivity, Szilard
Chalmers reaction, Isotope dilution analysis, Neutron activation
analysis, Diagnostic and therapeutic applications of radionu-
cleides, interaction of radiation with matter.
CHEM G521 Environmental Chemistry 5
Energy-flows and supplies, fossil fuels, nuclear energy, nuclear
waste disposal, renewable energy, industrial ecology, green
chemistry, ozone chemistry, effect of SO, NO as pollutants, re-
x x
formulated gasoline, water pollution and treatment, organochlo-
rine and organophosphate pesticides, eco-system effects, Toxic
chemicals – Effect of dioxins, polychlorinated biphenyls (PCBs)
and species of metals such as lead, mercury, cadmium etc.
CHEM G531 Recent Advances in Chemistry 5
The course is aimed at providing an overview of recent devel-
opments in selected areas of chemistry. Topics to be covered
may be drawn from: modern theories of structure, bonding and
reactivity, spectroscopy, chemical dynamics, phase transitions,
surface phenomena, solid state materials, and synthetic and
mechanistic organic and inorganic chemistry, or such other top-
ics as may emerge in the development of the subject.
CHEM G541 Chemical Applications of Group Theory 5
Groups, subgroups and classes : definitions and theorems; mo-
lecular symmetry and symmetry groups; representation of
groups; character tables; wave functions as bases for irreducible
representations; direct product; symmetry adapted linear combi-
nations; symmetry in molecular orbital theory; hybrid orbitals;
molecular orbitals of metal sandwich compounds; ligand field
theory; molecular vibrations; space groups.
CHEM G551 Advanced Organic Chemistry 5
Recent advances in aromatic electrophilic and nucleophilic sub-
stitution reactions and nucleophilic addition reactions; oxidation
and reduction; enolates in organic synthesis; retro synthetic
analysis; multiple step synthesis; protecting groups.
CHEM G552 Advanced Inorganic Chemistry 5
Advanced coordination chemistry, reactions, kinetics and mech-
anism; advanced organometalic chemistry, bonding models in
inorganic chemistry, inorganic chains, rings, cages and clusters;
group theory and its applications to crystal field theory, molecu-
lar orbital theory and spectroscopy (electronic and vibrational);
inorganic chemistry in biological systems.
CHEM G553 Advanced Physical Chemistry 5
Equilibrium: The laws of Thermodynamics, applications to phase
equilibrium, reaction equilibrium, and electrochemistry; Struc-
I-36
ture: Principles and techniques of quantum mechanics, applica-
tions to atomic and molecular structure and spectroscopy, statis-
tical thermodynamics, molecular interactions, macromolecules,
solid state; Dynamics: Molecular motion in gases and liquids, re-
action rate laws, mechanisms and rate theories of complex reac-
tions, molecular reaction dynamics, surface processes, electron
transfer dynamics.
CHEM G554 Physical Methods in Chemistry 5
Advanced spectroscopic and non-spectroscopic techniques
used in chemistry; Topics will include electronic absorption spec-
troscopy of organic and inorganic compounds, ORD, CD; vibra-
tional rotational spectroscopy symmetry aspects; Dynamic and
Fourier transform NMR, NOE, Multipulse methods, Two-
Dimensional NMR; EPR; NQR; Mossbauer spectroscopy; Mag-
netism; Ionization Methods: Mass spectrometry, Ion Cyclotron
Resonance; Photoelectron Spectroscopy; Microscopic tech-
niques: TEM, STM, AFM; EXAFS, XANES; X-ray Crystallog-
raphy.
CHEM G555 Chemistry of Life Processes 4
Synthesis and structures of biopolymers such as proteins and
nucleic acids; nucleic acid replication, transcription and transla-
tion; lipids and biomembranes; transport across membranes;
neurotransmission; enzyme and enzyme inhibitors; citric acid
cycle, pentose phosphate pathway and nucleic acid metabo-
lisms; photosynthesis; electron transport systems in respiration
and oxidative phosphorylation.
CHEM G556 Catalysis 4
A comprehensive survey of the catalytic processes along with
the fundamental aspects of the catalyst design and evaluation;
several classes of heterogeneous industrial catalysts; their prep-
aration, characterization and applications, recent developments
in catalysis, application of nanomaterials in catalysis.
CHEM G557 Solid Phase Synthesis and Combinatorial 4
Chemistry
A comprehensive understanding of solid phase synthesis and
combinatorial chemistry, basic principles of solid phase organic
synthesis; solid phase organic synthesis strategies; introduction
to combinatorial chemistry; analytical techniques in combinatori-
al chemistry; applications of the combinatorial approach in
chemistry, drug development and biotechnology.
CHEM G558 Electronic Structure Theory 5
Advanced methods in theoretical and computational chemistry
based on Quantum Mechanics: Review of mathematical back-
ground, N-Dimension complex vector spaces, linear variational
problem, many electron wave functions and operators, operators
and matrix elements; Ab-initio methods: Hartree-Fock (H-F),
Configuration Interaction (CI), Many Body Perturbation Theory
(MBPT); Density Functional Theory: Thomas-Fermi model, Ho-
henberg-Kohn theorems, derivation of Kohn-Sham equations;
Development and use of software for such models.
CHEM G559 Bioinorganic Chemistry 4
Fundamentals of inorganic biochemistry; essential and non-
essential elements in bio-systems, metalloproteins and metal-
loenzymes; role of metal ions in oxygen carriers, synthetic oxy-
gen carriers, bioinorganic chips and biosensors; fixation of dini-
trogen, environmental bioinorganic chemistry; transport and
storage of metal ions in vivo, metal complexes as probes of
structure and reactivity with metal substitution; fundamentals of
toxicity and detoxification, chelating agents and metal chelates
as medicines, nuclear medicines.
CHEM G561 Heterocyclic Chemistry 5
The fundamental structural characteristics; synthesis and reac-
tions of various heterocycles with nitrogen, oxygen and sulphur
heteroatom in the ring; heterocyles such as pyrrole, thiophene,
furan, imidazole, thiazole, oxazole, indole, benzofuran, pyridine
and quinoline; advanced synthesis and reaction mechanism of
heterocyclic compound.
CHEM G562 Solid State Chemistry 4
Basics of solid state chemistry, comprehensive survey of differ-
ent synthesis techniques, properties and their structural-property
relationship of solid materials; introduction to special nano-
materials, ceramics, polymers, biopolymers and nanocompo-
VI
sites; thermal and mechanical properties of nanomaterials;
nanocomposites in hydrophobic applications; recent advances in
material science and technology.
CHEM G563 Advanced Statistical Mechanics 5
Review of ensembles, fluctuations, Boltzmann statistics, quan-
tum statistics, ideal gases and chemical equilibrium; imperfect
gases; distribution function theories and perturbation theories of
classical liquids; electrolyte solutions; kinetic theory of gases;
continuum mechanics; Boltzmann equation; transport processes
in gases and Brownian motion; introduction to time-correlation
function formalism.
Chinese
CHI N101T Beginning Chinese 3 0 3
Basic grammar; sentence construction; vocabulary building;
conversations; dialogues; listening; translation of simple pas-
sages.
Computer Science
CS F111 Computer Programming 3 1 4
Basic Model of a Computer; Problem Solving-Basic Computing
Steps and Flow Charting (Assignment, Sequencing, Condition-
als, Iteration). Programming Constructs – Expressions, State-
ments, Conditionals, Iterators/Loops, Functions/Procedures; Da-
ta Types – Primitive Types, Tuples, Choices (Unions or Enu-
merations), Lists/Arrays, Pointers and Dynamically Allocated Da-
ta. Input output and Files.
Laboratory Component: Programming Exercises involving de-
velopment and testing of iterative and procedural programs us-
ing bounded and unbounded iterations, function composition,
random access lists, sequential access lists, dynamically allo-
cated lists, and file access.
CS F211 Data Structures & Algorithms 3 1 4
Introduction to Abstract Data Types, Data structures and Algo-
rithms; Analysis of Algorithms – Time and Space Complexity,
Complexity Notation, Solving Recurrence Relations.; Divide-and-
Conquer as a Design Technique; Recursion – Recursive Data
Types, Design of Recursive Functions / Procedures, Tail Recur-
sion, Conversion of Recursive Functions to Iterative Form. Line-
ar data structures – Lists, Access Restricted Lists (Stacks and
Queues); Searching and Order Queries. Sorting – Sorting Algo-
rithms (Online vs. Offline, In-memory vs. External, In-space vs.
Out-of-space, Quick Sort and Randomization), Lower Bound on
Complexity of Sorting Algorithms. Unordered Collections: Hash
tables (Separate Chaining vs. Open Addressing, Probing, Re-
hashing). Binary Trees – Tree Traversals. Partially Ordered Col-
lections: Search Trees and Height Balanced Search Trees,
Heaps and Priority Queues. Probabilistic/Randomized Data
Structures (such as Bloom Filters and Splay Trees). Generalized
Trees – Traversals and applications. Text Processing – Basic
Algorithms and Data Structures (e.g. Tries, Huffman Coding,
String search / pattern matching). External Memory Data struc-
tures (B-Trees and variants). Graphs and Graph Algorithms:
Representation schemes, Problems on Directed Graphs
(Reachability and Strong Connectivity, Traversals, Transitive
Closure. Directed Acyclic Graphs - Topological Sorting), Prob-
lems on Weighted Graphs (Shortest Paths. Spanning Trees).
CS F212 Database Systems 3 1 4
Data modeling, database design theory, data definition and ma-
nipulation languages, relational data model, relational algebra
and relational calculus, SQL, functional dependencies and nor-
malization, storage and indexing techniques, query processing
and optimization, transaction management - concurrency control
and crash recovery; distributed databases.
CS F213 Object Oriented Programming 3 1 4
Object orientation concepts, theories and principles; fundamen-
tal concepts of the object model: classes, objects, methods and
messages, encapsulation and inheritance, interface and imple-
mentation, reuse and extension of classes, inheritance and pol-
ymorphism; overloading and overriding; static and dynamic bind-
ing; multithreaded programming; event handling and exception
handling; process of object oriented requirements specification,
I-37
analysis and design; notations for object-oriented analysis and
design; case studies and applications using some object orient-
ed programming languages. Object Oriented Design Patterns:
Behavioral, Structural and Creational.
CS F214 Logic in Computer Science 3 0 3
propositional logic – syntax, semantics, satisfiability & validity,
predicate or first order logic – syntax, semantics, satisfiability &
validity, completeness & compactness, Undecidability & incom-
pleteness; Godel’s incompleteness theorem; SAT solvers; verifi-
cation by model checking, linear-time temporal logic (LTL), &
computational tree logic (CTL). Program verification using Hoare
logic & proofs of correctness; Modal logic & logic programming
paradigm.
CS F215 Digital Design 3 1 4
Boolean Algebra & logic minimization; combinational logic cir-
cuits : arithmetic circuit design , Design using MSI components;
Sequential Logic Circuits : flip flops & latches, registers and
counters, Finite state machine ; HDL Implementation of Digital
circuits; Digital Integrated Circuits ; Programmable logic devices;
Memory organization ; Algorithmic State machine; Introduction to
computer organization; The course will also have laboratory
component on digital design.
CS F222 Discrete structures for Computer Science 3 0 3
Sets & operation on sets; relations & equivalence relations;
number theory; weak & strong form of mathematical induction;
principle of inclusion & exclusion, pigeonhole principle; recur-
rence relations & generating functions; digraphs & graphs, graph
isomorphism & sub-graphs, spanning trees, Euler & Hamiltonian
graphs, planar graphs, chromatic numbers & graph coloring;
groups; Lagrange theorem finite groups; Rings & Fields.
CS F241 Microprocessors & Interfacing 3 1 4
Programmers model of processor, processor architecture; In-
struction set, modular assembly programming using subroutines,
macros etc.; Timing diagrams ; Concept of interrupts: hardware
& software interrupts, Interrupt handling techniques, Interrupt
controllers; Types of Memory & memory interfacing; Program-
mable Peripheral devices and I/O Interfacing ; DMA controller
and its interfacing: Design of processor based system . This
course will have laboratory component.
CS F266 Study Project 3
These courses include projects which are oriented towards read-
ings from published literature or books about new frontiers of
development or analysis of available database. These courses
are normally available to students in second or higher levels.
These courses must coterminate with project reports.
CS F301 Principles of Programming Languages 2 0 2
The course covers features of programming languages and in-
troduces the main programming paradigms. It covers, in detail,
the semantics of the features of programming languages –
Control Abstraction, Data Types and Data Abstraction, Scope
and Parameter passing and Concurrency related features. It co-
vers various aspects of runtime environments like global and lo-
cal data, code, function call stacks, dynamically allocated data,
runtime features for exceptions and threads. Introduction to pro-
gramming paradigms. Functional paradigm – formal elements of
lambda calculus, introduction to syntax of common functional
programming languages and programming exercises that ex-
plore the functional paradigm. Logic programming paradigm -
formal elements of logic programming and programming tasks
that explore the logic paradigm. Scripting as a paradigm. Do-
main specific languages. Applications of the principles of pro-
gramming languages –program verification, software testing and
security.
CS F303 Computer Networks 3 1 4
Introduction; Need for Computer Networks; Top-down vs. Bot-
tom-up approaches; Network Services, and Protocols; Network
Reference Models and Architectures, Architecture of the Inter-
net, Types and Applications of contemporary and emerging
Networks, Application-Layer Requirements, Concepts, Services
and Protocols: Protocols for Web, Email, File transfer, Name
Resolution, Address Assignment / Discovery, Remote Access
Services, Voice/Video over IP, Webcasting, Video-Conferencing
VI
and Telepresence, Network Management Protocols and Overlay
Networks; Transport Layer Requirements, Services, Concepts
and Protocols; Network Layer Requirements, Concepts, Ser-
vices and Protocols, Routing vs. Layer-3 Switching; QoS; Link
Layer and Physical Layer Requirements, Concepts, Services
and Protocols, Logical Link and Medium Access Control con-
cepts, Physical medium dependent function, Modes of Signaling
and Communication at the lower layer; IEEE 802 architecture,
Bridging versus Layer-2 Switching; VLANs, VPNs, Performance
vs. Security, Emerging Trends and Best Practices related to de-
sign of computer networks and internetworks.
CS F314 Software Development for Portable Devices 2 1 3
Introduction to mobile computing and emerging mobile applica-
tion and hardware platforms; Developing and assessing mobile
applications; Software lifecycle for mobile application – design
and architecture, development – tools, techniques, frameworks,
deployment; Human factors and emerging human computer in-
terfaces (tangible, immersive, attentive, gesture, zero-input); Se-
lect application domains such as pervasive health care, m-
Health; Mobile web browsing, gaming and social networking.
CS F315 Information and Communication Technolo-3 0 3
gies and Development
Development models; Sustainable Development Goals and Mil-
lennium Development Goals; role of Information and Communi-
cation Technologies (ICTs) in development; case studies of suc-
cesses and failures in different domains like low cost communi-
cation networks, education, information kiosks, livelihood, health,
etc.; theories that have emerged over the years and their criti-
cisms; evaluation of the role of ICTs in development
CS F316 Quantum Architecture and Programming 3 0 3
Quantum computing basics, quantum computer architectures,
reversible computing, quantum gates, computing models, Ehren-
fest’s urn model, Kac-Ring model, designing quantum ALUs,
Pendulum instruction set architecture (PISA), fault-tolerant archi-
tectures, the Steane code, Quantum processing elements, quan-
tum RAM and quantum addressing, reversible programming,
quantum compilers.
Pre-requisite: CS F215: Digital Design
CS F317 Reinforcement Learning 3 0 3
Introduction to RL and its applications, RL Goals and Rewards,
Finite Markov Decision Processes, Temporal Difference Learn-
ing, Value function and Policy Evaluation, Tabular Methods,
Function approximation, Sarsa, Q-learning, Approximate Solu-
tion Methods, Multi-agent RL, Actor-Critic methods including Ad-
vantage Actor Critic (A2C) and Asynchronous Advantage Actor
Critic (A3C).
CS F320 Foundations of Data Science 3 0 3
Introduction to Data Science, Review of Probability, Random
Variables and Probability Distributions, Bayesian probabilities,
Conditional Gaussian distributions, Marginal Gaussian distribu-
tions, Bayes’ theorem for Gaussian variables, Maximum likeli-
hood and Bayesian Inference for the Gaussian, Mixtures of
Gaussians, Probability Bounds, Nonparametric Methods - Kernel
density estimators, Nearest-neighbour methods, Bayesian Curve
Fitting, Introduction to constrained and unconstrained optimiza-
tion, High Dimensional Data & Curse of Dimensionality, Dimen-
sionality Reduction, PCA & SVD, Data Visualization Techniques,
OLAP and Multidimensional Data Analysis, Data Pre-processing,
Big Data & Big Data Analytics, Social Media data.
CS F342 Computer Architecture 3 1 4
Processor performance criteria, performance benchmarks,
arithmetic circuits, CPU design - instruction set architecture, in-
struction execution, Single and Multicycle implementation, Pipe-
line design, Hazards, methods of overcoming hazards, Branch
prediction, Memory subsystems including cache optimization,
Instruction level Parallelism.
CS F351 Theory of Computation 3 0 3
Review of Set Theory - Cardinality, Countable and Uncountable
Infinite Sets, Relations and Functions, Equivalence Relations. In-
troduction to Languages and Operations Applicable to Lan-
guages. Regular Expressions. Finite State Automata - Determin-
istic and Non-Deterministic – Equivalence, FSAs and Regular
I-38
Expressions – Closure Properties of Regular Languages –
Equivalence Classes of a Language and Minimal Automata.
Non-Regular Languages. Context Free Grammars and Push
Down Automata – Equivalence and Closure Properties – Normal
forms and Concepts in Parsing – Languages that are not Con-
text Free. Turing Machines – Unrestricted Grammars – Equiva-
lence – Various Forms of TMs and their Equivalence. Recursive
functions. Universal Turing machine – Reductions – Decidability
– Undecidable Languages. Complexity Classes – P, NP and NP-
Completeness.
CS F363 Compiler Construction 2 1 3
Introduction - Compilation and Execution Environments -
Compilers and Interpreters – Requirements and Motivation;
Front-end and Back-end of compilers/interpreters; Intermediate
Representation and Intermediate Languages; Compile Time vs.
Execution Time; Translators, and Assemblers; Virtual Machine -
Just-in-Time Compilers. Structure of a Compiler – Phases and
Passes. In-memory data - intermediate versions of code, symbol
table. Lexical Analysis: error handling & tool construction, DFA,
Defining tokens using regular expressions, Designing and im-
plementing scanners / lexical analyzers. Parsers: Context Free
Languages (introduction where needed)and Recognizing CFLs.
Parsing techniques – LL , LR - LR (0),LR(1), LALR) . Intermedi-
ate Representation: Parse Trees and Abstract Syntax Trees; 3-
address code. Semantic Analysis. Back End Phases: Machine
Independent optimizations: Loop Optimization Techniques -
Loop Unrolling, Induction variable based optimization, Loop-
Invariant code elimination. Procedure Call Optimization, and
Dead Code Elimination. Target Code Generation : Data Flow
Analysis, Register Allocation, Instruction Selection & Scheduling.
Memory Management : Memory allocation support, Memory- de-
allocation – Garbage Collection Techniques. Advanced Topics
:Issues in compiling Object Oriented Languages, Functional
Languages, Concurrent Languages, Script & Query Languages.
CS F364 Design and Analysis of Algorithms 3 0 3
Basic Design Techniques – Divide-and-Conquer, Greedy, Dy-
namic Programming (Examples, Analysis, General Structure of
Solutions, Limitations and Applicability). Specialized Design
Techniques: Network Flow, Randomization (Examples, Analysis,
Limitations). Complexity Classes and Hardness of Problems – P,
NP, Reductions, NP-hardness and NP-Completeness, Reduc-
tion Techniques, Basic NP-complete problems. Design Tech-
niques for Hard Problems – Backtracking, Branch-and-Bound,
and Approximation (General approaches and structure of solu-
tion, Analysis, and Limitations). Linear Programming – LP Prob-
lem and Simplex Algorithm, Approach for using LP for modeling
and solving problems. Introduction to Design and Analysis of
Parallel and Multi-threaded Algorithms.
CS F366 Lab Project 3
CS F367 Lab Project 3
These courses include projects involving laboratory investigation
or laboratory development in the students discipline or interdis-
ciplinary areas. These courses are normally available to stu-
dents in third or higher levels. These courses must coterminate
with project reports.
CS F372 Operating Systems 3 0 3
Introduction to operating systems; Various approaches to design
of operating systems ; Overview of hardware support for
0perating systems; Process/thread management: synchroniza-
tion and mutual exclusion, inter process communication, CPU
scheduling approaches ;Memory management: paging, segmen-
tation ,virtual memory, page replacement algorithms ; File sys-
tems: design and implementation of file systems; Input/Output
systems; device controllers and device drivers; Security and pro-
tection ; Case studies on design and implementation of operat-
ing system modules.
CS F376 Design Project 3
CS F377 Design Project 3
These courses are intended to impart training in design of prod-
uct/ process or other artifact to the students in the discipline or
interdisciplinary areas. These courses are normally available to
students in third or higher levels. These courses must cotermi-
nate with project reports.
VI
CS F401 Multimedia Computing 3 0 3
Introduction to multimedia; media & data streams; image, video
& audio file formats; image & video processing, synthesis of
sound signal; image coding & compression, video & audio co-
decs, low bit rate video telephony; audio-visual integration, lip
reading, face animation; augmented reality; multimedia search
services, content based image & video indexing; access to mul-
timedia, human-machine interfaces, spoken language interface;
algorithm vs. architecture based approaches, multimedia pro-
cessors, performance quantification; case studies, vision 2010.
CS F402 Computational Geometry 3 0 3
Introduction to Computational Geometry, degeneracies and ro-
bustness, convex hull in 2D, line-segment intersection, doubly-
connected edge list, computing the overlay of two subdivisions,
art gallery theorem, guarding and triangulation, monotone poly-
gons, partitioning arbitrary polygon into monotone polygons, tri-
angulating a monotone polygon, range search problem, Kd-
trees, range trees, fractional cascading, point location problem,
trapezoidal maps, randomized incremental algorithm to compute
trapezoidal map, post-office problem, Voronoi diagram and its
properties, Algorithm to compute Voronoi diagram, Delaunay tri-
angulation and relation with Voronoi diagram, Computing Delau-
nay triangulation, line and point duality, arrangement of lines,
application of computational geometry.
CS F404 Computer Crime and Forensics 2 0 2
Introduction to Computer Forensics: collection, preservation,
analysis, preparation and presentation of computer based evi-
dence for the purposes of criminal law enforcement or civil litiga-
tion. Structure of Storage Media: Study of different file systems
(FAT12, FAT16, FAT32, NTFS, EXT2/EXT3, etc). Study of digi-
tal forensic techniques: Disk forensics, Network forensics and
Device forensics. Understanding Computer Crime, Data Acquisi-
tion, Forensic Analysis (Internet History files, Email files and ma-
jor operating system files for different OS’s). Study of Steganog-
raphy: information hiding and retrieval. Live versus Dead foren-
sics. Use of Forensic Tools for file system analysis, registry
analysis, network analysis, etc. Introduction to computer crimes
in India and abroad.
CS F406 Ethical Hacking 2 2 3
Techniques and tools for ethical hacking and countermeasures;
exploit approaches – social engineering, scanning, foot-printing,
enumeration, sniffers, buffer overflows, web-hacking including
cross scripting, SQL injection, privilege escalation, root kits,
search engine highjack, covert channel, binary auditing, services
specific hacking like DNS, Email, Web servers, Proxy; tech-
niques of bypassing security mechanisms and hardening sys-
tems and networks for countermeasures of security analysis,
monitoring and analysis tools including network traffic and sys-
tem logs.
CS F407 Artificial Intelligence 3 0 3
The object of this course is to give an introduction to the prob-
lems and techniques of A.I. along with the applications of A.I.
techniques to the fields like natural language understanding, im-
age processing, game theory and problem solving.
The course also aims at understanding its implementation using
LISP and PROLOG languages.
CS F413 Internetworking Technologies 3 0 3
Introduction to internetworking concepts; the internet architec-
ture; goals and key issues related to internetworking technolo-
gies; design aspects; HTTP and other relevant protocols; agent
technology and tools relevant to the internet; techniques of data
compression; voice, video, and interactive video-on-demand
over the internet; multimedia operating systems and their impact;
multimedia networking; mobile computing; internet security; case
studies.
CS F415 Data Mining 3 0 3
Data Mining – introduction, fundamental concepts; motivation
and applications; role of data warehousing in data mining; chal-
lenges and issues in data mining; Knowledge Discovery in Data-
bases (KDD); role of data mining in KDD; algorithms for data
mining; tasks like decision-tree construction, finding association
rules, sequencing, classification, and clustering; applications of
I-39
neural networks and machine learning for tasks of classification
and clustering.
CS F422 Parallel Computing 3 0 3
Introduction to parallel computing; Models of parallel computers;
Interconnection networks, basic communication operations; In-
troduction to parallel algorithms; Parallel programming para-
digms; issues in implementing algorithms on parallel computers;
Parallel programming with message passing interface; Perfor-
mance analysis; Scalability analysis; Basic design techniques for
parallel algorithms; Parallel algorithms for selected topics like
sorting, searching and merging, matrix algebra, graphs, discrete
optimization problems and computational geometry.
CS F424 Software for Embedded Systems 3 1 4
Real-time and Embedded Systems; Software issues in Embed-
ded Systems; Software Development Process; Requirements
Analysis – Use Cases, Identification and Analysis of use cases,
Use Case Diagrams. Design – Architectural Design, Design Pat-
terns, Detailed Design. Implementation – Languages, Compilers,
Runtime Environments and Operating Systems for embedded
software. Testing – Methodologies, Test Cases.
CS F425 Deep Learning 3 0 3
Basic neural networks, derivative-based optimisation, gradient
descent and its variants, various learning algorithms: SGD,
RMSProp, Adam, Shallow Networks, Stacking, multilayer per-
ceptron, activation functions, parameter initialisation strategy,
cost function, backpropagation using gradient descent, visual
data, convolution operation, pooling, variants of convolution
function, CNN architectures: Dense convolutional neural net-
works (DenseNets), AlexNet, VGG, etc., sequence models,
GRU, LSTM, encoders-decoders, vanishing gradient, autoen-
coders, generative modelling, VAE, real world applications.
CS F426 Graph Mining 3 1 4
Managing and mining graphs which are massive and cannot
held in main memory, applications of graphs are web, social
networks, computational biology, communication networking
etc., static graphs, dynamic graphs, indexing and querying
graphs, graph representation, random walks, page rank, triangu-
lar computation, Node classification, Graph clustering, graph
similarity and alignment, Graph summarization, subgraph min-
ing, streaming graphs, Deep learning for graphs
Pre-requisite: CS F211 : Data Structure and Algorithms
CS F427 Performance Analysis of Computer Networks 3 0 3
Network Delay Models, Queuing Models, Delay modelling using
multi-dimensional markov chain, M/G/1 models for network sys-
tems, Erlan-B, BCC and BCQ models for TDM/FDM systems,
analysing networking protocols and cellular system, Network
traffic modeling, long range dependent propertied of network
traffic, Network of queues, closed queuing networks, Network
Simulation, discrete event simulation, simulation work flow, ex-
perimental planning and factor reduction.
Pre-requisite: CS F303 : Computer Networks
CS F428 Special Topic in Computer Science 1 0 1
This is a one-unit course. This course allows a special topic of
study for individuals or small groups of students who wish to
gain particular or additional knowledge in a special topic. The
topics can be chosen from certain recent / emerging areas of
knowledge or alternatively it could also be used of covering cer-
tain advance concept and recent developments supplementing
the existing full course .
CS F429 Natural Language Processing 3 0 3
Introduction to NLP and its applications, N-Gram Language
Models, Vector representation of words, Parts Of Speech Tag-
ging, Topic Modelling using Latent Dirichlet allocation, Statistical
Machine Translation, Constituency Grammars, Logical Repre-
sentations of Sentence Meaning, Information Extraction, Word
Senses and WordNet, Question Answering, Dialog Systems and
Chatbots.
CS F430 Approximation Algorithms 3 0 3
P vs NP, NP-optimization problems, approximation ratio; multi-
plicative and additive. Design techniques for approximation algo-
rithms: greedy, local search and other combinatorial techniques,
VI
dynamic programming and approximation schemes, randomized
techniques, LP based techniques; randomized rounding, primal-
dual, iterative rounding, local ratio, dual-fitting, semi-definite pro-
gramming based techniques. Hardness of approximation: ap-
proximation classes, non-approximability results, gap technique,
approximation preserving reductions, and the PCP theorem.
Pre-requisite: CS F364: Design & Analysis of Algorithms
CS F431 Combinatorial Optimization 3 0 3
Linear programming(LP), simplex algorithm, duality in LP, dual
simplex algorithm, applications of duality and primal-dual algo-
rithm to solve graph problems. Polynomial-time algorithms for
LP: ellipsoid algorithm, interior point methods; Karmakar’s algo-
rithm. Integer linear programming (ILP); total unimodularity and
its applications. Algorithms for solving ILP problems.
Pre-requisite: CS F211: Data Structures & Algorithms
CS F432 Brain-inspired Deep Learning 3 0 3
Introduction to Brain-inspired Deep Learning, Deep Learning and
Knowledge Representation in the Brain; Spiking Neurons and
Neural Networks; Neural Information Processing; Evolving net-
works and Reservoir Computing; Applications of Brain-inspired
Deep Learning and case studies; Neuromorphic technologies
and hands-on coding with state-of-the-art neuromorphic software
and hardware. Pedagogical approach will emphasise on student-
led learning, creative thinking, and dissemination.
CS F433 Computational Neuroscience 3 0 3
Biophysics of action potentials, local field potentials (LFP) and
electroencephalogram (EEG), and their recording and analysis
techniques; modelling a neuron - starting with the Nobel-prize
winning Hodgkin-Huxley model; information processing in neural
populations; synaptic mechanisms and learning by association;
meso- and macro-scale neural population networks and their
dynamics; modelling of neurological disorders as observed in
higher level brain signals such as the LFP, EEG, functional
magnetic resonance imaging (FMRI); validation of neural models
with data. Alongside theory, students will be introduced to soft-
ware tools (using python/Matlab/C based on student prefer-
ences) to simulate neural computations and models.
CS F441 Selected Topics from Computer Science 3
This course is primarily intended to introduce the students of
computer science to topics, either in recent advances or of spe-
cial interest. Topics may be taken from one or more of the areas
like artificial intelligence, theory of computing, networking and
distributed processing, digital control, information theory, super
computers, special purpose architectures and language proces-
sors.
CS F444 Real–Time Systems 3 0 3
Introduction to real-time systems, clock synchronization, task
assignment and scheduling, programming language with real-
time support, ADA, real-time communication protocols, real-time
databases, fault tolerant techniques, reliability evaluation meth-
ods; case studies in real-time operating systems, simulation of
real-time systems, embedded system programming.
CS F446 Data Storage Technologies and Networks 3 0 3
Storage Media and Technologies – Magnetic, Optical and Semi-
conductor media, techniques for read/write operations, issues
and limitations. Usage and Access – Positioning in the memory
hierarchy, Hardware and Software Design for access, Perfor-
mance issues. Large Storages – Hard Disks, Networked At-
tached Storage, Scalability issues, Networking issues. Storage
Architecture. - Storage Partitioning, Storage System Design,
Caching, Legacy Systems. Storage Area Networks – Hardware
and Software Components, Storage Clusters/Grids. Storage
QoS – Performance, Reliability, and Security issues.
CS F451 Combinatorial Mathematics 3 0 3
Course description is to be developed.
CS F468 Information Security Project 0 3 3
Malware and Malware Identification, Terminate-and-Stay-
Resident programs, Identification of signatures/patterns of virus-
es, Developing Antivirus tools, Single system firewalls and rules,
Rootkits and identification of rootkits, Virtual machines, Sand-
boxes and run-time monitors.
CS F469 Information Retrieval 3 0 3
I-40
Organization, representation, and access to information; catego-
rization, indexing, and content analysis; data structures for un-
structured data; design and maintenance of such data struc-
tures, indexing and indexes, retrieval and classification
schemes; use of codes, formats, and standards; analysis, con-
struction and evaluation of search and navigation techniques;
search engines and how they relate to the above. Multimedia da-
ta and their representation and search.
CS F491 Special Project 3
This is an unstructured open-ended course where under the
overall supervision of an instructor-in-charge, batches of stu-
dents will be attached to different instructors. Each batch will
work on a specific time-bound project which is of basic or pe-
ripheral concern of his discipline. Each student must submit a
project report as a culmination of his endeavour and investiga-
tion. The instructor- in-charge will determine the choice of the
project and also whether or not the project report is to be submit-
ted jointly by a group or individually by a student. The course will
aim to evaluate student's actual ability to use the fundamentals
of knowledge and to meet new unknown situations as demon-
strated by the students' interaction with the instructors and in-
structor-in- charge and aggregated in the project report. The in-
structor-in- charge may assign specific hours for formal brain-
storming sessions.
CS G501 Mobile Computing 5*
Course description to be developed.
CS G511 Design and Analysis of Algorithms 3 2 5
Design techniques such as divide-and-conquer, recursion, back-
tracking, branch-and-bound, simulation; Analysis in terms of av-
erage level and worst level efficiency; Relationship to appropri-
ate data structures; Illustrations dealing with problems in com-
puter science, graph theory and mathematics; Computational
complexity and bounds; NP-hard and NP-complete problems.
CS G512 Introduction to Authoring Systems 4
Characteristics and principles of expert systems; construction
and transfer of expertise; meta-knowledge; tools and formalisms
for expert systems; application through programs in prolog; state
of art characteristics and principles of authoring systems; imple-
mentation techniques.
CS G513 Network Security 3 1 4
This course examines issues related to network and information
security. Topics include security concepts, security attacks and
risks, security architectures, security policy management, securi-
ty mechanisms, cryptography algorithms, securitystandards, se-
curity system interoperation and case studies of the current ma-
jor security systems.
CS G514 Object Oriented Analysis and Design 2 2 4
Object orientation concepts, theories and principles; fundamen-
tal concepts of the object model: classes, objects, methods and
messages, encapsulation and inheritance, interface and imple-
mentation, reuse and extension of classes, inheritance and pol-
ymorphism; process of object-oriented requirements specifica-
tion, analysis and design; notations for object-oriented analysis
and design; case studies and applications using some object
oriented programming languages.
CS G515 Queueing Systems Theory 3 2 5
Resource sharing issues and theory of queueing systems; Re-
view of Markov chains and baby queueing theory; Method of
stages. M/Er/1. Er/M/1. Bulk arrival and bulk service systems.
Series-parallel stages. Fundamentals of open and closed queue-
ing networks. Intermediate queueing theory: M/G/1; G/M/m. Col-
lective marks. Advanced queueing theory: G/G/1; Lindley inte-
gral equation; spectral solution. Inequalities, bounds, approxima-
tions.
CS G516 Advanced Database Systems 3 1 4
Object-oriented databases, Parallel databases, Distributed data-
bases, NoSQL databases, Deductive databases, Spatial data-
bases, Multimedia databases, Query optimization, Information
retrieval, XML.
VI
CS G517 Network and System Security 4*
Course description is to be developed.
CS G518 Internet of Things: Design and Development 3 1 4
Logical design of IoT and enabling technologies, IoT protocol
stack, IoT architecture and middleware design, introduction to
Raspberry Pi and Python, QEMU simulator, application layer
protocol like MQTT, CoAP, XMPP, XMPP-IoT, transport proto-
cols like UDP, DTLS, TLS, RTP, STUN, data link protocols like
6LoWPAN, Wi-Fi, Bluetooth, Zigbee, WiMax, LR-QPAN, WPA2,
L2CAP, SAFER+, IoT data and cloud computing, IoT data and
machine learning, network performance and SDN and NFV,
Blockchain and IoT.
Co-requisite CS F303 :Computer Networks OR EEE F414 OR
ECE F414 : Telecommunication Switching Systems and Net-
works OR EEE F346 : Data Communication Networks
CS G519 Social Media Analytics 3 1 4
Basics of social media, its modelling & representation, node
classification, community detection, user behaviour, herd behav-
iour, influence, recommendations in SM, controversy detection,
sarcasm detection, fake post detection, behavioural analysis,
SM driven problems such as mental health, spreading rumours,
etc.
Equvalent: SS G519
CS G520 Advanced Data Mining 3 1 4
Topics beyond conventional record data mining. Mining complex
data structures. Tree/graph mining, sequence mining, web/text
data mining, stream data mining, spatiotemporal data min-
ing, mining multi-variate time series data, high-dimensional data
clustering, and mining social networking sites. Mining data from
multiple relations (Multi-relational Data Mining). Privacy preserv-
ing Data Mining. Distributed computing solutions for data inten-
sive data mining.
CS G521 Object Oriented Programming 2 2 4
Basics of object oriented programming: objects, classes, in-
stances; inheritance; polymorphism; operator overloading; static
and dynamic binding; small talk, C++, cases from other object
oriented languages like Ada, Loop, Flavors, Objective-C, etc.;
object oriented software engineering.
CS G523 Software for Embedded Systems 3 2 5
Real-time and embedded systems; software issues in embedded
system; software development process; requirement analysis:
use cases, identification and analysis of use cases, use case di-
agrams; design: architectural design, design patterns and de-
tailed design; implementation: languages, compilers, runtime
environments and operating systems for embedded software;
testing: methodologies, test cases. The course will also consist
of laboratory practices and development of software for embed-
ded systems.
CS G524 Advanced Computer Architecture 3 0 5
Basics of Parallelism, Instruction Level Parallelism, Simultane-
ous Multi-Threading, Design and Optimization Techniques for
Cache and DRAM; Pipelining and Super-scalar Techniques,
Multiprocessor and Multi-core architecture, Shared Memory and
Cache Coherence Issues; Multi-vector and SIMD computers,
Performance evaluation methods, Interconnect Design Tech-
niques.
CS G525 Advanced Computer Networks 3 2 5
Topics in advanced networking – Quality of Service in IP net-
works, IPv6, Wireless and Mobile Networks, Carrier Technolo-
gies (Frame Relay, FDDI, ISDN, ATM), Peer-to-Peer Networks
and Overlays, Routing and QoS Issues in Optical Networks.
CS G526 Advanced Algorithms & Complexity 3 2 5
Advanced Algorithm Design Strategies such as Randomization,
Approximation and Game-Theoretic Techniques. Design of Par-
allel and Distributed Algorithms. Design of algorithms for applica-
tion domains such as Internet / Web, and Computational Biolo-
gy.
I-41
CS G527 Cloud Computing 5
Review of Distributed computing - Concurrency, message pass-
ing, connectivity and failure models, replication. Computing In-
frastructure - Processing Power, Storage aggregation, I/O &
Communication, Clusters and Data Centers. Resource modeling
and virtualization - CPU virtualization, memory and storage vir-
tualization, virtualized networks. Services - Service models and
service contracts; Programming on the cloud. Cloud Applications
- Software on the Cloud and Infrastructure Services. Cloud infra-
structure - Private vs. Public Clouds, Resource scaling and Re-
source provisioning. Quality of Service - Performance models,
scalability, Performance measurement and enhancement tech-
niques. Security issues - Data/ Storage Security, Resource Ac-
cess Control, Process Isolation and Control, Service Policies
and Privacy Issues.
CS G531 Testable Design & Fault Tolerant Computing 3 2 5
Fault: types, modelling and simulation; testing methodologies,
coverage, economics and quality; test vector generation: design
for testability, built-in self tests; fault tolerant computing; fault tol-
erant software.
CS G541 Pervasive Computing 4*
Select application architectures; hardware aspects; human-
machine interfacing; device technology: hardware, operating
system issues; software aspects, java; device connectivity is-
sues and protocols; security issues; device management issues
and mechanisms; role of web; wap devices and architectures;
voice-enabling techniques; PDAs and their operating systems;
web application architectures; architectural issues and choices;
smart card-based authentication mechanisms; applications; is-
sues and mechanisms in WAP-enabling; access architectures;
wearable computing architectures.
CS G551 Advanced Compilation Techniques 5
Generic Code Optimization Techniques - loop optimization, inlin-
ing, and other transformations. Impact of architectures on code
generation and optimization: RISC architectures, VLIW architec-
tures, special-purpose architectures. Architecture-specific code
optimizations – register allocation, instruction scheduling. Code
Optimizations under real-time / embedded constraints - cache-
less / diskless memory models, bounded time responses. Gar-
bage Collection Techniques. Virtual Machines and Just-in-Time
Compilation techniques - HotSpot-like optimizations. Implemen-
tation of exception handling, concurrency, and generic jumps
(like call/cc).
CS G553 Reconfigurable Computing 5
Overview of Programmable Logics. FPGA fabric architectures.
Logic Elements and Switch Networks. Design and Synthesis of
Combinational and Sequential Elements. Placement and Rout-
ing. Pipelining and other Design Methodologies. Fine-grained
and Coarse-Grained FPGAs. Static and Dynamic Reconfigura-
tion. Partitioning. Hardware/Software Portioning and Partial
Evaluation. Systolic Architectures.
CS G554 Distributed Data Systems 3 2 5
Distributed File Systems - File System Models; Replication and
Synchronization - Caching; Failure & Recovery; File System Se-
curity. Distributed Databases - Distributed Data Sources and
Updates; Database Connectivity; Concurrency Control and Dis-
tribution mechanism; Distributed indexing schemes. Database
security. Data on the Web - Web as a distributed data repository.
Data Collection and Use Crawlers, Search Engines, and Index-
ing Schemes. Information Retrieval Techniques.
Data Exchange - Hierarchical Data Models, XML, and query lan-
guages. Semi-structured / Unstructured data -querying and syn-
chronization.
Pervasive Data - Data distribution and access for non-computing
devices, small computing devices, embedded computing devices
and sensory devices.
CS G555 System Specifications and Modelling 3 3 4
Requirement analysis, specification formalisms, system model-
ing issues, system modeling languages, Hardware Specification
and verification languages, EDA tools and its applications.
CS G557 Distributed Computing 5*
VI
Course description is to be developed.
CS G559 Database Security 5*
Course description is to be developed.
CS G562 Advanced Architecture and Performance 3 2 5
Evaluation
Introduction to advanced architectures; parallel processing; pipe-
lining and vector processing; array processing; SIMD computers
and processor enhancement; performance evaluation methods,
statistics and discrete math applications; modelling for evalua-
tion of virtual memory; time sharing environments.
CS G564 Advanced Cryptography 5*
Course description is to be developed.
CS G566 Secure Software Engineering 5*
Best practices for designing secure systems, software engineer-
ing principles for designing secure systems, criteria for designing
secure systems; analysis of system properties and verification of
program correctness; use of formal methods and verification for
security; tools for verification of security properties; techniques
for software protection (such as code obfuscation, tamper-
proofing and watermarking) and their limitations; analysis of
software based attacks (and defenses), timing attacks and leak-
age of information, and type safety.
CS G568 Network Security Project 0 3 3
Network Intrusion and Intrusion Detection Techniques and
Tools; Denial-of-Service attacks and Techniques/Tools for han-
dling them; Network Firewalls and Firewall policies/mechanisms;
Network-wide authentication schemes for users/clients/servers;
Network-wide storage and storage security models and imple-
mentations.
CS G611 Distributed Processing Systems 2 2 4
Concepts of distributed processing, networkable architectures,
inter process and processor communication algorithms, process
migration and porting techniques etc.
CS G612 Fault Tolerant System Design 2 3 5
Principles of fault tolerant systems, redundancy, parallel and
shared resources, spatial systems, configurations, design as-
pects etc.
CS G622 Local Area Networks: Design and Implemen- 2 3 5
tation
Introduction to Local Networks; carrier sense networks; shared
memory and device systems; protocol and token passing tech-
niques & algorithms; security and integrity problems; algorithms
and implementation; and selected current topics.
CS G623 Advanced Operating Systems 3 2 5
Overview of advanced operating systems: motivation for their
design, and various types of advanced operating systems; Dis-
tributed operating systems: architecture of distributed systems,
theoretical foundation of distributed systems, deadlock detec-
tion/resolution, aggrement protocols, file systems, distributed
shared memory, scheduling, fault tolerance and recovery; Multi-
processor operating systems: multiprocessor system architec-
tures, multiprocessor operating system design issues, thereads,
process synchronization, process scheduling and memory man-
agement; Data base operating systems: introduction, concurren-
cy control: theoretical and algorithmic aspects; Case Study:
Amoeba and Mach.
CS G631 Devices, Data Communications and Control 3 2 5
Principles of operations of I/O devices; device handlers; master-
slave control & controllers; Intelligent mode of operation; device
handlers; most popular data communication methods; synchro-
nisation and handshaking; design of controllers for selected de-
vices.
CS G632 Application Driven System Design 0 4 4
General principles of application driven systems, examples from
space and high speed digital imaging systems, Bandwidth con-
siderations, design aspects etc
CS G641 Microprocessor-Based Systems Design 2 3 5
Small systems organisation; bus architectures; building blocks
I-42
around a microprocessor; memory techniques; RAM disks;
paged memory modules; communications and data transfers;
monitors and operating systems; engineering applications of mi-
croprocessors as device controllers; concept of local and central
control.
CS G642 Recent Advances in Computing 2 2 4
Introduction to transputing and transputers, minimization algo-
rithms, design aspects. Neural networks modelling, simulation
and design. Optical computing and recent advances.
CS G651 Symbolic Computing & Computer Algebra 2 2 4
Course description is to be developed.
CS G652 Digital Communications and Message 3 2 5
Switching
Signals & transmission types; noise; coding & decoding; modula-
tion techniques; filters; time and frequency multiplexing; mes-
sage switching; protocols; packet switching systems; remote
networks; satellite linking communications.
CS G653 Software Architectures 3 2 5
Systems engineering and software architectures; Hatley-Pirbhai
architectural template; architecture flow diagrams; requirements
engineering and software architecture; architectural design pro-
cesses; design post-processing; real-time architectures; archi-
tectural design patterns; software architecture and maintenance
management; object oriented architectures; client-server archi-
tectures; forward engineering for object oriented and client-
server architectures; emerging software architectures.
CS G671 Advanced Computer Graphics 3 2 5
Overview of computer graphics and graphic devices; two dimen-
sional & three dimensional curve representations, rotations and
transformations; surfaces, generation, representation, rotation
and transformations; modelling techniques; concepts in geomet-
ric design.
Design Engineering
DE G511 Advanced Methods in Applied A Mathemat-5
ics
Suitable topics from amongst the following: linear algebra; vector
analysis; numerical methods to solve different types of equa-
tions; approximate numerical solutions of ordinary and partial dif-
ferential equations; integral transform; linear and nonlinear opti-
mization techniques; mathematical programming; mathematical
modelling; calculus of variations; random variates and statistical
techniques; decision models and analysis.
DE G512 Finite Element Analysis 5
Element properties, Isoparametric elements, Finite element
methods and analysis, Applications in design including continu-
um mechanics, Dynamic systems, Heat conduction and Electri-
cal potentials, etc. will be taken up.
DE G513 Tribiology 3 2 5
Introduction, lubricants and lubrication, surface texture, bearing
materials, fundamentals of viscous flow, reynolds equation and
applications, thrust bearings, journal bearings, squeeze-film
bearings, hydrostatic bearings, gas bearings, dry and starved
bearings, selecting bearing type and size, principles and operat-
ing limits, friction, wear and lubrication.
DE G514 Fracture Mechanics 3 2 5
Introduction, energy release rate, stress intensity factor and
complex cases, anelastic deformation at the crack tip, elastic
plastic analysis through J-integral, crack tip opening displace-
ment, test methods, fatigue failure, numerical analysis, mixed
mode crack initiation and growth.
DE G521 Instrumentation and Applied Electronics 5
Generalized instrumentation system for measurement and con-
trol; performance characteristics of instruments; analytical tech-
niques - time and frequency domain analysis, Laplace and Fou-
rier transform techniques; sensors and transducers; Feedback
measurement system, ynalmg and digital signal conditioning and
conversion techniques, telemetry techniques, improvement of
signal-to-noise ratio, statistical instrumentation techniques;
transducers interfacing; computer control instrumentation, elec-
VI
tronic bench instruments, etc.
DE G522 Design Projects 3 2 5
Practice in engineering design through projects emphasizing
creative solutions to engineering design problem. Illustrative
case studies of design will be taken up. The course will be con-
ducted through selected group/individual projects.
DE G531 Product Design 3 2 5
Introduction to creative design; user research and requirements
analysis, product specifications, Computer Aided Design; stand-
ardization, variety reduction, preferred numbers and other tech-
niques; modular design; design economics, cost analysis, cost
reduction and value analysis techniques, design for production;
human factors in design: anthropometric, ergonomic, psycholog-
ical, physiological considerations in design decision making; le-
gal factors, engineering ethics and society.
DE G532 Quality Assurance & Reliability 5
Quality planning and control, economics of quality control, Speci-
fications, tolerances and process capability studies, total quality
control concepts in quality circles, quality incentives. Fundamen-
tal concepts of reliability engineering, Failure analysis, Reliability
versus quality control, Systems reliability evaluation, reliability al-
location, maintainability, and designing for reliability. Illustrative
examples of design ensuring reliability to be taken up.
DE G611 Dynamics & Vibrations 3 2 5
Steady and transient Vibration of single and multi degree free-
dom systems. Systems with distributed mass and elasticity. Non-
linear and self-excited vibrations, structural damping, Random
vibrations, vibration analysis, vibration control - reduction, isola-
tion and vibration absorbers.
DE G621 Digital & Microprocessor Based 5
Systems
Digital system design using combinational and sequential cir-
cuits; processor architecture, assembly programming and sys-
tem design using peripheral devices such as PPI, Interrupt con-
troller, DMA controller, etc. Microcontroller architecture and typi-
cal applications; concept of bus based system design and PC
based system design.
DE G631 Materials Technology & Testing 5
Study of characteristics and technology of metals, plastics, rub-
bers, ceramics, polymers, composites, optical fibres and other
modern engineering materials and their application with particu-
lar reference to Railways. Destructive and non-destructive test-
ing techniques and their applications in Railways.
Electronics and Communication Engineering
ECE F211 Electrical Machines 3 1 4
Transformer: Constructional features, equivalent circuit and
p h a sor diagram - regulation and efficiency, parallel operation.
Three phase transformer connections; Harmonic in transformers;
Testing; Phase conversion; Autotransformer. D.C Machines:
Construction, armature windings, armature voltage and torque
equations, classification. D.C generators, performance charac-
teristics; D.C motors - torque/speed characteristics, speed con-
trol and braking. Testing and efficiency. Induction machines:
Constructional features and rotating magnetic field. Circuit model
and phasor diagram.
Steady state characteristics. Testing, starting and speed control.
Time harmonics and space harmonics. Wound rotor induction
motors, Single phase induction motors - classification and
equivalent circuit. Synchronous machines: Constructional fea-
tures; synchronous generators and motors; equivalent circuit
and phasor diagram; power and torque characteristics and ca-
pability curves. Parallel operation. Salient pole synchronous ma-
chine - phasor diagram and determination of synchronous reac-
tances; starting and speed control of synchronous motors. Spe-
cial machines- universal motors, Induction generators.
ECE F212 Electromagnetic Theory 3 0 3
Review of mathematics - scalar and vector fields, calculus of
scalar and vector fields in Cartesian and curvilinear coordinates,
Dirac delta function; Electrostatics - electric field, divergence &
I-43
curl of e(cid:10) lectric field, electric potential, work and energ y in elec-
trostatics, conductors, electric dipole; Electrostatics in Matter -
polarization and field of a polarized object, electric displacement,
linear dielectrics; Magnetostatics - Lorentz force law, Biot-Savart
law, divergence & curl of magnetic field, magnetic vector poten-
tial, magnetic dipole; Magnetostatics in matter - magnetization
and field of a magnetized object, the H-field, linear & non-linear
magnetic media; Electrodynamics - electromotive force, electro-
magnetic induction, Maxwell's equations in free space, plane
wave solutions of Maxwell’s equations in free space.
ECE F214 Electronic Devices 3 0 3
Crystal structure and growth of semiconductor, electrical con-
duction in solids, Elementary quantum physics (Photoelectric ef-
fect, uncertainty principle, Schrodinger wave equation and tun-
neling), energy bands in solids, charge carriers in semiconduc-
tors, excess carriers in semiconductors, Fabrication of p-n junc-
tions, equilibrium conditions, forward and reverse biased junc-
tions, metal-semiconductor junctions Bipolar junction transistors,
field effect transistors (JFET, HEMT, MOSFET), Special diodes
(varactor diode, solar cell, LEDs, Tunnel diode and HBT), dielec-
tric materials and insulation (Polarization mechanisms, frequen-
cy dependence, dielectric strength and insulation breakdown).
ECE F215 Digital Design 3 1 4
Boolean Algebra & logic minimization; combinational logic cir-
cuits : arithmetic circuit design , Design using MSI components;
Sequential Logic Circuits : flip flops & latches, registers and
counters, Finite state machine ; HDL Implementation of Digital
circuits; Digital Integrated Circuits ; Programmable logic devices;
Memory organization ; Algorithmic State machine; Introduction to
computer organization; The course will also have laboratory
component on digital design.
ECE F216 Electronic Devices Simulation Laboratory 0 2 2
Hands on simulation experience of Electronic Devices (Diodes,
BJTs, MOSFET and MOS Capacitor) using Sentarus TCAD;
Simulation of electrostatics of various Electronic Devices and
their effects on the device performance.
Pre-requisites:
EEE F214 / INSTR F214 / ECE F214 : Electronic Devices
ECE F241 Microprocessors and interfacing 3 1 4
Programmers model of processor, processor architecture; In-
struction set, modular assembly programming using subroutines,
macros etc.; Timing diagrams ; Concept of interrupts: hardware
& software interrupts, Interrupt handling techniques, Interrupt
controllers; Types of Memory & memory interfacing; Program-
mable Peripheral devices and I/O Interfacing ; DMA controller
and its interfacing: Design of processor based system. This
course will have laboratory component.
ECE F242 Control Systems 3 0 3
Modeling and classification of dynamical systems, Properties
and advantages of feedback systems, time-domain analysis,
frequency-domain analysis, stability and performance analysis,
State space analysis, controller design.
ECE F243 Signals and Systems 3 0 3
This course is intended to provide a comprehensive coverage of
Signals and Systems, a fundamental subject of Electrical Engi-
neering. The topics covered are: Continuous-time and discrete
time signals and systems, convolution, properties of linear time-
invariant (LTI) systems, Fourier series, Fourier transform, Z
transform, Laplace transform; System analysis, frequency re-
sponse, analog filters, Sampling and reconstruction.
ECE F244 Microelectronic Circuits 3 0 3
Basic microelectronic circuit analysis and design, biasing in dis-
crete and integrated circuit amplifiers, an overview of modeling
of microelectronic devices single and two transistor amplifier
configurations with passive and active loads; current mirrors &
current sources; single-ended and differential linear amplifiers ,
differential and multistage amplifiers; 2 stage CMOS OPAMP,
frequency response of amplifiers; negative feedback in amplifi-
ers, R-C frequency compensation.
ECE F266 Study Project 3
These courses include projects which are oriented towards read-
VI
ings from published literature or books about new frontiers of
development or analysis of available database. These courses
are normally available to students in second or higher levels.
These courses must coterminate with project reports.
ECE F311 Communication Systems 3 1 4
Analysis and design of communication systems; analog and digi-
tal modulation and demodulation, frequency conversion, multi-
plexing, noise and distortion; spectral and signal-to-noise ratio
analysis, probability of error in digital systems, spread spec-
trum.Introduction to the basic principles of the design and analy-
sis of modern digital communication systems. Topics include
source coding, channel coding, baseband and passband modu-
lation techniques, receiver design, and channel equalization.
ECE F312 EM Fields and Microwave Engineering La-0 1 1
boratory
Experiments in Microwaves and antennas using Microwave
benches and simulation softwares.
ECE F314 Electromagnetic Fields and Microwave En-3 0 3
gineering
Electromagnetic waves; Maxwell's equations; Poynting theorem
and wave equations; propagation of EM waves; transmission
lines; microstrip lines; wave guides; cavities and antennas; mi-
crowave generators, microwave amplifiers; measurement at mi-
crowave frequencies.
ECE F341 Analog Electronics 3 1 4
Introduction to operational amplifiers: The difference amplifier
and the ideal operational amplifier models, concept of negative
feedback and virtual short; Analysis of simple operational ampli-
fier circuits; Effects of real operational amplifier parameters on
circuit performance . Linear applications of operational amplifi-
ers: Instrumentation and Isolation amplifiers; Current and volt-
age sources; Active filters. Non-linear applications of opera-
tional amplifiers: Comparators,; Linearization amplifiers; Loga-
rithmic amplifiers, multifunction modules & circuits, true rms con-
vertors, Precision and signal conditioning circuits, Waveform
Generation: sinusoidal and non-sinusoidal signal generation;
Wave shape converters. Timer 555 based circuits, Phase lock
loop circuits & applications, IC regulators, Output stage and
large signal amplifiers, Power amplifiers, Tuned amplifiers, Ana-
log and Digital interface circuits: A/D, D/A Converters.
ECE F343 Communication Networks 3 03
Packet switching and circuit switching; layered network architec-
ture (OSI model), point-to-point protocols and links: physical lay-
er, error detection and correction, ARQ retransmission strategy,
framing, X.25 standard, queueing theory and delay analysis: Lit-
tle’s theorem, analytical treatment of M/M/1 and M/M/m queuing
systems, simulation of queueing systems, delay analysis for
ARQ system, multi-access protocols and techniques: Aloha sys-
tems, CSMA, IEEE-802 standards, routing and flow control.
TCP/ IP protocols, ISDN, ATM, network security, design of a
LAN system with commercially available functional units. Wire-
less LAN: adhoc network, security issues.
ECE F344 Information Theory and Coding 3 0 3
Random variables and random processes; Information sources
and source coding theorem, Kraft inequality, Shannon-Fano
codes, Huffman codes, Arithmatic Codes, Lempel-Ziv-Welch al-
gorithm, universal source codes; channel capacity: channel ca-
pacity; noisy channel coding theorem for discrete memoryless
channels; channel capacity with feedback; continuous and
Gaussian channels; error control coding: linear block codes and
their properties, hard-decision decoding, convolution codes and
the Viterbi decoding algorithm, iterative decoding; turbo codes
and lowdensity-parity-check codes; rate distortion theory: rate
distortion function, random source codes; joint source-channel
coding and the separation theorem; cryptography: basic con-
cepts on cryptography and cryptoanalysis, security issues; pri-
vate-key encryption algorithms- stream ciphers, block ciphers,
Shannon's theory; introduction to number theory - modular
arithmetic, exponentiation and discrete logarithms in Galois field;
public-key encryption algorithms- Diffie-Hellman public-key dis-
tribution scheme, RSA public-key cryptosystem; Message au-
thentication, hashing functions, digital signatures.
I-44
ECE F366 Lab Project 3
ECE F367 Lab Project 3
These courses include projects involving laboratory investigation
or laboratory development in the students discipline or interdis-
ciplinary areas. These courses are normally available to stu-
dents in third or higher levels. These courses must coterminate
with project reports.
ECE F376 Design Project 3
ECE F377 Design Project 3
These courses are intended to impart training in design of prod-
uct/ process or other artifact to the students in the discipline or
interdisciplinary areas. These courses are normally available to
students in third or higher levels. These courses must cotermi-
nate with project reports.
ECE F414 Telecommunication Switching Systems and 3 0 3
Networks
Intoduction, electromechanical switching, pulse dialing and
DTMF dialing, stored program control, space division switching,
speech digitization and transmission, time division switching,
fundamentals of traffic engineering, telephone networks, signal-
ing, data networks, layered architecture and protocols, LANs,
packet switching networks, TCP/IP, ISDN, ATM networks.
ECE F416 Digital Communication 3 0 3
Introduction, the modeling and characterization of information
sources, algorithms for source coding and encoding of analog
output sources; Information transmission through AWGN chan-
nels using digital modulation methods and BER estimation; Digi-
tal communication through band limited Gaussian noise chan-
nels; channel coding and decoding; Wireless communication
channels: its characterization and modulation schemes for such
channels; emerging trends in the above field.
ECE F418 Modern Communication Technologies 3 0 3
Modern communication systems overview, Digital modulation
techniques, Channel capacity and coding, Digital link improve
techniques, Digital receiver design and performance analysis,
Wireless communication systems: wireless channel models and
link improvement techniques, multiple access schemes. Basic
concept of mobile network, Optical Communication Systems:
Transmitters, receivers and other optical Communication sub-
system, Optical wireless systems.
ECE F423 Electronic Material Design and Simulations 1 2 3
Laboratory
Reviewing the basic Theory for Crystalline Solids (Crystal group,
real Space, reciprocal space), Introduction of the Concept of
Density Functional Theory (Many Electron Scenario, Born-
Oppenheimer Approximation, Hartree’s Formulation, Hohenberg
and Kohn Theorems, Energy Functional, Kohn Sham Scheme),
Familiarization with Quantum Espresso (Plane Wave Basis Set,
Exchange Correlation Functional, Pseudopotential, Brillouin
Zone Sampling, Quantum Espresso input file format), Theoreti-
cal Calculation of Structural Properties of Materials (Unit Cells
and Super Cells, Lattice Vectors, Ground-state Energy, Bond-
Length and Bond Angles), Theoretical Calculation of Electronic
Properties of Materials (Energy Band Profiles and Density of
States, Projected Density of States), Theoretical Calculation of
Optical Properties of Materials (Optical Spectrum), Introduction
of Doping in Materials (Effects on Electronic and Optical Proper-
ties), Introduction of Strain in Materials (Effects on Electronic
and Optical Properties) Simulation of 2D materials like Graphene
and MoS2.
Pre-requisites:
EEE F214 / INSTR F214 / ECE F214 : Electronic Devices
ECE F424 Smart Grid for Sustainable Energy 3 0 3
Introduction to Smart grid, Renewable Power Generation and
Energy Storage, Microgrid, Power System Economics and Elec-
tricity Markets, Demand Response, Various Sensing, Communi-
cation, and Control technologies, and Application of Data Sci-
ence.
Pre-requisites:
EEE F242 / INSTR F242 / ECE F242 : Control Systems
VI
ECE F428 Energy Storage Systems 3 0 3
Need of Energy Storage; Broad classification of Energy Storage
Systems and applications; Electrochemical Energy Storage Sys-
tems; Battery Storage; Application oriented choice of Batteries;
Electrical interface system design for Batteries with Renewable
Energy sources; Battery Management Systems (BMS); Hydro-
gen Energy Storage; Its application as Fuel cell, Electrical Ener-
gy Storage; Thermal Energy Storage; Mechanical Energy Stor-
age and their applications.
ECE F431 Mobile Telecommunication Networks 3 0 3
Fundamentals of mobile telecommunications, with an overview
of first generation (analog) systems and more detailed coverage
of second generation (digital) technologies; technology basics
including descriptions of wireless network elements, spectrum
allocation, frequency re-use, characteristics of the transmission
medium; over the-air (OTA) interface characteristics; capacity,
coverage, speech coding, channel coding and modulation tech-
niques of TDMA and CDMA technologies; network characteris-
tics; architecture, signaling, element management of IS-41 and
GSM networks; call processing; call setup and release, handoff,
roaming, advanced services; mobile data communications; cir-
cuit and packet switched data services, third generation (wide-
band data) mobile communications system requirements/ archi-
tecture.
ECE F434 Digital Signal Processing 3 1 4
Introduction; design of analog filters; design of digital filters ( IIR
and FIR); structures for the realization of digital filters; random
signals and random processes; linear estimation and prediction;
Wiener filters; DSP processor architecture; DSP algorithms for
different applications.
ECE F472 Satellite Communication 3 0 3
Review of microwave communications and LOS systems; the
various satellite orbits like GEO, MEO, LEO; the satellite link
analysis and design; the communication transponder system like
INSAT, INELSAT etc; the earth segment and earth station engi-
neering; the transmission of analog and digital signals through
satellite and various modulation techniques employed; the multi-
ple access techniques like FDMA, TDMA, CDMA, DAMA, etc;
the INSAT program; salient features of INSAT – systems and
services offered; satellite services offered by INTELSAT, IN-
MARSAT and future satellites like IRIDIUM etc; future trends in
satellite communications.
ECE F491 Special Project 3
This is an unstructured open-ended course where under the
overall supervision of an instructor-in-charge, batches of stu-
dents will be attached to different instructors. Each batch will
work on a specific time-bound project which is of basic or pe-
ripheral concern of his discipline. Each student must submit a
project report as a culmination of his endeavour and investiga-
tion. The instructor- in-charge will determine the choice of the
project and also whether or not the project report is to be submit-
ted jointly by a group or individually by a student. The course will
aim to evaluate student's actual ability to use the fundamentals
of knowledge and to meet new unknown situations as demon-
strated by the students' interaction with the instructors and in-
structor-in- charge and aggregated in the project report. The in-
structor-in- charge may assign specific hours for formal brain-
storming sessions.
Economics
ECON F211 Principles of Economics 3 0 3
Nature and scope of economic science, its relationship with oth-
er social sciences; quantification of economic variables, theories
of consumer behaviour and of the firm: linear economic models;
market structures; social accounting and basic elements of eco-
nomic planning.
ECON F212 Fundamentals of Finance and Accounts 3 0 3
Introduction to basic accounting principles for measuring and
communicating financial data, single and double entry, ledgers,
journals, trading, profit and loss and appropriation accounts, trial
balance and balance sheet; cash flow statements, risk-return
trade off notions, security analysis, structure of capital market,
primary and secondary market, introduction to financial system
I-45
and its components, financial market reforms.
ECON F213 Mathematical & Statistical Methods 3 0 3
Methods of collection and presentation of statistical data; calcu-
lation and interpretation of various measures like standard devia-
tion, variance, Kurtosis, correlation coefficient; Sampling Meth-
ods - Simple random sampling, with and without replacement,
stratified random sampling. Statistic and sample moments,
Sampling Distributions - Properties of Student’s – t, Chi-square
and F-distributions. Theory of Estimation - Point estimation,
method of moments; maximum likelihood; interval estimation.
Testing of Hypothesis - Statistical hypothesis, simple and com-
posite hypothesis,critical region, types and size of error, test of
simple hypothesis versus simple alternative. Analysis of Vari-
ance - Analysis of one-way classified data, application in the
study of relationships. Theory of Index Numbers - Calculation of
Laspeyre’s, Paasche’s, Fisher’s and Chain index numbers, crite-
ria of a good index number, cost of living index numbers, base
shifting, splicing and deflating of index numbers. Introduction to
Regression Analysis - Specification of simple linear regression
model, least square method of estimation, classical assump-
tions, general and confidence approach to hypothesis testing.
ECON F214 Economic Environment of Business 3 0 3
Business and Economics, Government and business; market an
the role of the Government, market failure, Government and the
market, government and the firm, Fiscal policy and the environ-
ment, Macroeconomic environment; macroeconomic environ-
ment of business, Business activity, employment and inflation,
monetary policy and economic environment, balance of payment
accounting, Business in the international environment; World
trade and international monetary system; international investing;
investment decisions in multinational markets; country risk; mul-
tinational corporate strategy; multinational treasury manage-
ment; currency risk; globalization and multinational business,
FDI, FII, pricing strategy and business.
ECON F215 Computational Methods for Economics 3 0 3
Introduction to Python; Basic econometrics with Python; Ma-
chine learning techniques in economics; Basic numerical meth-
ods in economics; Introduction to R & analysis with economic
data; Introduction to MATLAB; MATLAB’s applications in eco-
nomics and finance.
ECON F241 Econometric Methods 3 0 3
Business environment and economy, industrial policy, industrial
licensing, role of industry in economic development, monetary
and fiscal policy, inflation, foreign trade and balance of payment,
MRTP, FERA and FEMA Acts, business ethics and corporate
governance, IPR, technology issues, liberalization, privatization
and disinvestment, globalization, FDI, MNCs, international busi-
ness environment.
ECON F242 Microeconomics 3 0 3
Consumer behavior under risk, production function and linear
programming applications, derivation of cost and supply func-
tions, commodity pricing under imperfect market structures, fac-
tor pricing, multimarket equilibrium, optimization over time, wel-
fare optimization, game theory applications.
ECON F243 Macroeconomics 3 0 3
Systems of national accounts; input-output systems; flow of fund
systems; monetary circulation and exchange; basic model of in-
come determination; classical macroeconomic models; obsta-
cles of full employment; Keynes model, derivation of IS-LM func-
tions; three sector model; four sector model; inflation and Phillips
curve; real business cycles and new Keynesian economics;
monetary policy, fiscal stabilization policy; consumption hypoth-
esis; absolute income hypothesis, permanent income hypothe-
sis, life-cycle income hypothesis, relative income hypothesis, in-
vestment models; money supply and money demand.
ECON F244 Economics of Growth and Develop-3 0 3
ment
VI
Economic growth and development; models of economic growth;
harrod domar model, solow model, neoclassical models of eco-
nomic growth, the Feldman model, Cambridge model of
growth,models of technical progress, the problem of economic
development; causes of underdevelopment, human develop-
ment index, theories of economic development, classical and
neoclassical theory of economic development, Rostow stages
theory, balanced and unbalanced growth, the lewis theory of
economic development, Big-push theory, Critical Minimum effort
Hypothesis theory.
ECON F266 Study Project 3
These courses include projects which are oriented towards read-
ings from published literature or books about new frontiers of
development or analysis of available database. These courses
are normally available to students in second or higher levels.
These courses must coterminate with project reports.
ECON F311 International Economics 3 0 3
The international economy; early trade theories; comparative
advantage model; neo-classical trade theories; gains from trade;
offer curves, terms of trade; Edge-worth box, factor endowments
and the Heckscher-Ohlin model; alternative models of trade and
intra-industry trade; the imitation-lag hypothesis; product cycle
theory; international trade and economic growth; international
trade policy; tariff, non-tariff trade barriers, economic integration,
international trade and economic development, balance of pay-
ment accounting, foreign exchange markets and exchange
rates, exchange rate determination, open economy macroeco-
nomics; income and price adjustment mechanisms, adjustment
policies, macroeconomic policy in open economy.
ECON F312 Money, Banking and Financial Markets 3 0 3
Overview of the financial system, interest rate and their role in
valuation, fluctuation in interest rate, risk and term structure of
interest rate, rational expectation and efficient market hypothe-
sis, central banking and the conduct of monetary policy, money
supply and credit creation, monetary transmission mechanisms,
fundamentals of financial institutions, banking and management
of financial institutions, commercial banking industry, risk man-
agement in financial institutions, credit risk, analysis of various
financial and economic crisis.
ECON F313 Issues in Economic Development 3 0 3
Income and Growth; Facets of Underdevelopment; Structural
Features; contemporary models of development and underde-
velopment, poverty, inequality and development, population and
economic development, urbanization and rural-urban migration,
education and health in economic development, environment
and economic development, trade and economic development,
FDI and economic development, infrastructure and economic
development. Sustainable development.
ECON F314 Industrial Economics 3 0 3
Economic analysis of the theory and practice of organization of
firms and industries. Nature of competition among firms and their
behaviour in various markets, with specific emphasis on imper-
fectly competitive markets. Tools for empirical and theoretical
approaches to the analysis of industries. Issues related to price
discrimination, vertical integration, advertising, research and de-
velopment activities and entry and exit of firms. Government
regulation of industries.
ECON F341 Public Finance Theory and Policy 3 0 3
Role of Government in modern economy, Theory of Public good
and public choice; public goods and externalities, equity in distri-
bution, Public Expenditure and Macro-economy: Determining op-
timal size of government, financing of public expenditure, debt
versus tax financing, impact of public expenditure on the level
and composition of output and employment, Government budget
and cost benefit analysis, Taxation; Direct and Indirect taxes, ef-
ficiency and equity, tax incidence, models of taxation incidence,
theory of optimal taxation, recent developments in theory of
taxation, evolution of tax structures, tax evasion and avoidance,
designing of modern tax system, reforms in direct and indirect
taxes, value added tax, fiscal federalism, designing optimal gov-
ernment expenditure policy; Fiscal Policy Issues: Budget deficit
and public debt, interdependence of fiscal and monetary poli-
cies, theory of inter-governmental transfers, theory and policy of
I-46
subsidies, theory of fiscal federalism, issues of equity and effi-
ciency, role of planning and finance commission, goods and ser-
vices tax in India, new direct tax code, role of central and state
FRBMs.
ECON F342 Applied Econometrics 3 0 3
This course provides a introduction to advanced estimation and
econometric techniques of analysis, with particular emphasis on
how these techniques can be used for the empirical testing of
economic theories and/or policy prescriptions. Topics to be stud-
ied include specification, estimation, and inference in the context
of models that include then extend beyond the standard linear
multiple regression framework. Multiple regression analysis;
analysis of generalized linear and nonlinear models; instrumen-
tal variables; maximum likelihood, generalized method of mo-
ments (GMM), and two step estimation methods; simultaneous
equation models; time series processes; identification and esti-
mation of time series models; techniques for assessing model fit;
forecasting; time series analysis and models of expectations;
univariate time series analysis, stationary vs. non-stationary se-
ries; ARIMA, GARCH, VAR, cointegration, granger causality, er-
ror correction and limited dependent variable models; auto re-
gressive distributed lagged variable models multivariate time se-
ries analysis; dynamic models; analysis of panel data, balanced
and unbalanced panel data, mixed, fixed and random effect
models.
ECON F343 Economic Analysis of Public Policy 3 0 3
This course deals with the contributions of economic analysis to
public policy and governance. It focuses on evaluating the ra-
tionale for government intervention in the economy and evaluat-
ing the efficiency, incentive, and distributional effects of social
and economic policies. Introduction to of economic analysis;
economic tools in valuing outcomes; measuring outcomes in pol-
icies and programme; policy making; the market and the public
policy, policy framework and regulation, market and government
issues, distribution and policy analysis; applications in tax poli-
cies, welfare policies, government policies relating to contract-
ing, health, education, labour and employment, energy policy,
competition policy, gender, rural-urban development, food secu-
rity, climate change, infrastructure policy, financial and trade pol-
icy.
ECON F344 Models in Operations Management 3 0 3
Project Management Tools and Techniques, Forecasting Tech-
niques, Quality Management Tools, Facility layout and location
models, inventory management, aggregate planning, and
scheduling.
ECON F345 Behavioral Economics 3 0 3
Behavioral decision theory; perspective on psychology and eco-
nomics; heuristics and biases; bounded rationality; classical ex-
pected utility model; choice under uncertainty (and certainty);
probabilistic judgment; and inter-temporal choice; responses to
games; analogous games.
ECON F351 Indian Economic Development 3 0 3
Indian Economic Development; Understanding the Indian Econ-
omy, Growth of GDP and Per Capita Income, Planning for the
economy; plan models, Five Year Plans, Sectoral Aspects; Re-
gional Variations, Economic Reforms, Monetary Policy, National-
ization of Banks, Financial Sector Reforms; Role of Central
Banking in India. External Sector; Growth and structure of India’s
international trade; Balance of Payments, Import and Export Pol-
icies, India ,World Bank and IMF. Agricultural Policy; Land Re-
form, Agricultural Growth and Productivity, Irrigation; Green
Revolution and After, Price Policy; Subsidies; Impact of WTO.
Industrial Policy; Industrial Controls and Licensing, Productivity
and Growth, Industrial Credit Industrial Sickness-Foreign In-
vestment, Industrial Reforms, Investment, Regional Variations,
Impact of WTO, Social Sectors, Health and Education, Poverty
and Inequality in India, Human Development Indicators.
ECON F352 Management of Banks and Financial 3 0 3
Institutions
VI
Overview Of Banking Industry And Regulations; Critical Analysis
Of Bank’s Balance Sheet, Cost Of Funds Evaluation Of Bank
Performance; Management Of Profit & Loss Accounts Of A
Bank; Management Of Non-Interest & Non-Fund Income and
Expenses; Assessment & Management of Risks; Interest Rate
Risk, Credit Risk, Market Risk, Operational Risk, Liquidity Risk
Etc., Basel Accords, Correspondent Banking; Mortgage And As-
set-Backed Securities; Securitization, Innovation In Banking.
ECON F353 Energy Economics and Policy 3 0 3
Global Energy and Climate Policy; population and energy, ener-
gy intensity, energy crisis and alternate sources; understanding
cost-benefit analysis, life-cycle cost analysis and pricing devel-
opments, analysing and managing risks; energy and environ-
ment, energy security and governance ; economics of changing
role of crude oil, natural gas, coal, nuclear power and renewable
power; global energy markets and the challenge of mitigating
global climate change. Geopolitical dimensions of energy supply
and demand, regulatory approaches to cutting greenhouse gas-
es and building a low-carbon economy; future of energy scenar-
io.
ECON F354 Derivatives and Risk Management 3 0 3
Overview of Financial Markets. Introduction to derivatives. Defi-
nition of future, forward, option and swap. Difference between
various players of derivative market, their motives and types of
position they can hold. Mechanics of future, option & swap mar-
kets. Hedging strategies. Option Pricing and understanding of
various factors affecting option price. Calculations of Greeks. In-
troduction to interest rates, yield, term structure and forward
rates. Mechanics of Bond Market. Review of concept of com-
pounding and time value of money. Difference between floating
rate and fixed income bonds. Price quotes and accrued interest.
Pricing of Bonds. Computation of yield. Bond Price volatility. Du-
ration, Modified Duration and convexity. Factors affecting Bond
Yields and the Term Structure. Concept of Risk. Perspective of
Risk from view point of individuals, companies & financial institu-
tions. Commercial Banks and risks faced by them. Different
types of Insurance and risk faced insurance companies. Intro-
duction to various risks: Market Risk, Credit Risk, Operational
Risk, Liquidity risk & Model Risk. Concept of Value at Risk.
ECON F355 Business Analysis and Valuation 3 0 3
Theory of finance, value maximization, stakeholder theory, and
corporate objective function: value creation – ways and means,
business analysis: The techniques of strategy and competitive
analysis, value chain analysis for competitive advantages, busi-
ness valuation – approaches and methods, the dark side of val-
uation: strategic investment decisions.
ECON F356 Strategic Financial Management 3 0 3
Company Value and the Manager's Mission: Introduction to Val-
uation, Why Value Value? The Value Manager, Cash Is King
and Value-Based Management. Approach to Valuation - A Prac-
titioner's Guide: Frameworks for Valuation. Valuation Methods:
Discounted, Relative and Contingent Claim. Analyzing Historical
Performance. Forecasting Performance. Estimation of Discount
Rates. Estimation of Cash Flows. Estimation of Growth Rates.
Valuation Models: Dividend-Discount Models, Free-Cash-Flow-
To-Equity Discount Models, Free-Cash-Flow-to-firm Approach,
Price / Earnings Ratio, Price/Book Value Ratio and Price/Sales
Ratio. Measuring and Managing the Company Value: Company
Value vs. Shareholders Wealth Maximization - TSR. Economic
Value Added, Market Value Added and Cash Value Added.
Wealth Creator by the Indian Corporates. Analyzing the Compa-
ny Performance - Application of Balanced Scorecard (BSC). Ap-
plying Valuation: Multibusiness Valuation. Mergers, Acquisition ,
and Joint Ventures.
ECON F357 Management Control System 3 0 3
The nature of management control system, management control
environment; understanding strategies, revenue and expense
centers, profit centers, transfer pricing, measuring and control-
ling assets employed, The management control process; strate-
gic planning, budget preparation, analyzing financial perfor-
mance, performance measurement, management compensa-
tion, Variation in management control; controls for differentiated
strategies, service organizations, multinational organizations,
I-47
management control projects.
ECON F366 Lab Project 3
ECON F367 Lab Project
These courses include projects involving laboratory investigation
or laboratory development in the students discipline or interdis-
ciplinary areas. These courses are normally available to stu-
dents in third or higher levels. These courses must coterminate
with project reports.
ECON F376 Design Project 3
ECON F377 Design Project 3
These courses are intended to impart training in design of prod-
uct/ process or other artifact to the students in the discipline or
interdisciplinary areas. These courses are normally available to
students in third or higher levels. These courses must cotermi-
nate with project reports.
ECON F411 Project Appraisal 3 0 3
Criteria for selection of a project; factor intensity; commercial
profitability; national economic-profitability; limitations of market
prices; estimation of shadow prices; linkup project appraisal to
national objectives; McGaughey and Thorbeck approach; Little-
Mirrlees method; UNIDO guidelines approach; limitations of the
conventional project appraisal; towards a new framework for pro-
ject appraisal.
ECON F412 Security Analysis and Portfolio Manage-3 0 3
ment
Introduction to investment and securities; profile of financial as-
sets; new issue market or primary market, initial public offerings
(IPO); secondary market; framework of risk & return; fundamen-
tal analysis- economy, industry; company analysis; stock evalua-
tion models; multiple holding period and multiple growth rate;
bond analysis and bond management strategies; technical anal-
ysis; efficient market theory; portfolio management; Markowitz
model; Sharpe’s Single Index model; capital asset pricing model;
financial derivatives-options & futures.
ECON F413 Financial Engineering 3 0 3
Introduction; Review of Markets, Players, and Conventions;
Cash Flow Engineering with Forward Contracts; Engineering
Simple Interest Rate Derivatives; Swap Engineering; Report
Market Strategies; Dynamic Replication Methods and Synthet-
ics; Mechanics of Options; Options Engineering with Applica-
tions; Pricing Tools; Applications of Fundamental Theorem of Fi-
nance; Fixed Income Engineering; Tools for Volatility Engineer-
ing: Volatility Swaps and Volatility Trading; Engineering of Equity
Instruments: Pricing and Replication, computational methods
such as Monte Carlo Simulation.
ECON F414 Creating and Leading Entrepreneurial Or-3 0 3
ganizations
Fundamentals of entrepreneurship; entrepreneurship develop-
ment in emerging markets; entrepreneurial leadership; creativity
and business ideas; identifying business opportunities; legal as-
pects of business; entrepreneurship and intellectual property
rights; business plans; marketing plan; operation and production
plan; venture team and organizational plan; insights from finan-
cial statements; issues in raising finance; venture capitalist eval-
uation of business plans; launching a venture; corporate strate-
gies for growth; people skills, Public issue; revival, exit and end
to a venture.
ECON F415 New Venture Creation 3 0 3
Entrepreneurship as career option, idea to opportunity – market
analysis and segmentation, presenting a pitch deck, building the
startup team, industry and competition analysis, lean startups,
product development, protection of intellectual property, sales
and marketing, business models, financing options and strate-
gies, launching a business, growth and exit strategy, social en-
trepreneurship, business plan presentation skills.
ECON F416 Regional Economics 3 0 3
Concept of a region; scope and method of regional economics;
criteria for location of economic activities; regional economic
structure; measurement of regional economic activity; interre-
gional theory of income and trade; regional economic growth
VI
and its impact on regional structure; public policy.
ECON F418 Quantitative Analysis of International 3 0 3
Trade
Global trade and empirical facts of International trade, Nature of
Globalization process and benefits and costs associated with it,
Theory and empirical testing of trade theories, Alternative trade
theories and their empirical tests, Gains from trade and the im-
pact of trade on income distribution, Instruments of trade policy
and welfare effects, International factor movements and the im-
pact and spillover effects of FDI and portfolio investments, Dif-
ferent forms of Economic integration and their benefits and
costs, Technology and growth, International Technology Trans-
fer, Exchange rate and balance of payments, Trade policy simu-
lation using software, WTP Negotiations
ECON F419 Advanced Microeconomics 3 0 3
Household behaviour and consumer choice; firm’s Behav-
iour; Partial equilibrium analysis; Imperfect competition models;
Price discrimination strategies; General equilibrium analysis:
with and without production; Linear Programming and input-
output analysis; Asymmetric information issues in economics;
Modern welfare criteria; Arrow’s impossibility theorem; Elements
of welfare economics.
Pre-requisites: ECON F242 Microeconomics
ECON F420 Applied Macroeconometrics 3 0 3
Macroeconomic data; Basic Time Series Concepts; Time series
aggregation and Cycles; Univariate Time Series Models; Multi-
variate Time Series Models - VAR models, Granger Causality,
Impulse Response Function, Cointegration, and Vector Error-
Correction Models; Panel Data Methods; Macro-models - Dy-
namic Stochastic General Equilibrium Models (DSGE), Real
Business Cycle (RBC) Model, Heterogeneous Agent Models,
Monetary Models.
ECON F422 Functions and Working of Stock Ex-3 0 3
changes
Overview of financial markets and instruments; stock exchanges
in India; trading and settlement procedures; listing; risk man-
agement; primary markets; debt markets; indices; mutual funds;
derivatives; exchange traded funds; corporate governance; SEBI
and regulation of the markets; important events in the stock mar-
kets; market microstructure; empirical studies on the Indian mar-
kets.
ECON F471 Resources and Environmental Economics 3 0 3
Introduction to Environmental Economics; Economy-
Environment interaction; Environment vs. Development, Envi-
ronmental Kuznet's curve, Economics of Exhaustible Resources;
Solow-Harwick's Rule; Market structure and optimal extraction
policy; Uncertainty and the rate of resource extraction; Resource
scarcity, Economics of Renewable Resources ; Economics of
Biodiversity, The Theory of Externality and Public Goods ; Con-
cepts; Market Failure; Pigouvian Solution; Buchanan's Theory;
Coase's theorem and its critique; Pigouvian vs. Coasian solu-
tion; Detrimental externality and non convexities in the produc-
tion set; Property rights; Collective action, Techniques of Valua-
tion; Physical linkage methods; Abatement cost methods; Be-
havior linkage methods; Social cost benefit analysis, Environ-
mental impact assessment.
ECON F491 Special Projects 3
This is an unstructured open-ended course where under the
overall supervision of an instructor-in-charge, batches of stu-
dents will be attached to different instructors. Each batch will
work on a specific time-bound project which is of basic or pe-
ripheral concern of his discipline. Each student must submit a
project report as a culmination of his endeavour and investiga-
tion. The instructor- in-charge will determine the choice of the
project and also whether or not the project report is to be submit-
ted jointly by a group or individually by a student. The course will
aim to evaluate student's actual ability to use the fundamentals
of knowledge and to meet new unknown situations as demon-
strated by the students' interaction with the instructors and in-
structor-in- charge and aggregated in the project report. The in-
structor-in- charge may assign specific hours for formal brain-
storming sessions.
I-48
ECON G511 Dynamic Modeling and Control of Nation-5
al Economies
ECON G521 Modern Cost Engineering 5
Course description for the above courses are to be developed.
ECON G531 Theory of Macroeconomic Policy 5
This course focuses on macroeconomic policy as the major ap-
plication of the theoretical material and also considers the impli-
cations of macroeconomic events for asset price determination,
management, decisions, social problems and personal employ-
ment and retirement planning.
Topics to be covered are: the foundations of aggregate supply
and demand: use of AD-AS model; the business cycle; applica-
tions in the areas of asset market, management decisions, social
problems, etc.
ECON G541 Economic Systems Analysis 5
Course description is to be developed.
ECON G542 Accounting Theory and Empirical Re- 4
search
Introduction; Association between returns and earnings; Earn-
ings response coefficients; Earnings announcements; Earnings
and the variance of returns; Earnings and the volume of trade;
Market Efficiency (Post-Earnings Announcement Drift); Earnings
and Prices/Returns – Theory; Cash versus Accruals; Accounting
Measurement and Value Relevance; Voluntary Disclosures; Dis-
closure Level and the Cost of Equity; Accounting Choice and
Equity Contracts; Accounting Choice and Debt Contracts; Ac-
counting Choice and Political Costs; Modelling Discretionary Ac-
cruals; Adoption of IFRS; Process of conducting empirical ac-
counting research.
ECON G543 Advanced Corporate Finance 4
Information asymmetry and agency problem; Investment at the
Firm Level; Corporate Cash Holdings; Corporate Financial Policy
and the Value of Cash; Corporate Cash Reserves and Acquisi-
tions; Within Firm Capital Allocation; Corporate Diversification
and Firm Value; Corporate Restructuring; Mergers & Acquisi-
tions; Leveraged Buyouts, Spin offs and Divestitures; Corporate
Governance; Introduction to Behavioral Finance; Managerial Op-
timism; CEO Overconfidence.
ECON G544 Empirical Asset Pricing 4
Preliminaries: Background and Statistics of Asset Pricing; Pric-
ing Tests and Market Efficiency; Cross-Sectional and Time-
Series Asset Pricing Test; Market Efficiency, Inefficiency, and
Limits to Arbitrage; Return Predictability and Performance Eval-
uation; Evaluating Portfolio Managers; Alphas and Betas; Value
& Momentum; New Directions in Empirical Asset Pricing; Ro-
bustness of Anomalies; Other Asset Markets; The Financial Cri-
sis and the Future of Quantitative Investing; Trading and Liquidi-
ty; Algorithmic and High-Frequency Trading.
ECON G545 Financial Economics 4
Decision making under uncertainty; Expected utility representa-
tions; Risk aversion and insurance premium; Stochastic domi-
nance; Mean variance portfolio analysis; Characterization of
minimum variance portfolio and its properties; Case of riskless
asset; Asset pricing models; Capital asset pricing model; Arbi-
trage pricing theory; Intertemporal consumption and equity pre-
mium puzzle; Market efficiency and its critique; Forms of effi-
ciency and tests of efficiency; Anomalies and noise trader mod-
el.
ECON G546 Topics in Econometrics 4
Introduction; Fundamentals of Randomization Inference: The
basic problem of causal analysis; Potential outcomes causal
model; Approaches to identification: Randomized trials; Selec-
tion on observable; Difference-in-Differences; Two way fixed ef-
fects with differential timing; Synthetic control methods; Matching
and subclassification: Exact matching and approximate matching
Instrumental variables; Homogeneous treatment effects; Two-
stage least squares; Weak instruments; Heterogeneous treat-
ment effects; Identification; Estimation; Placebo checks; Inter-
pretation; External validity; Quantile regression for causal analy-
sis; Quantile regression with exogenous repressors and instru-
ment variable strategies with quantile regression; Regression
VI
discontinuity design; Sharp regression discontinuity design and
fuzzy regression discontinuity design; Identification; Estimation;
Falsification checks; Multiple cut-offs; Multiple running variables;
External validity; Regression kink designs.
ECON G547 Topics in Macroeconomics 4
Equilibrium output and models of employment & wages; The
quantity theory of money; The classical theory of the interest
rate; Fiscal and Monetary Policy implications of the Classical
equilibrium model; Models of income determination; Compo-
nents of aggregate demand; Consumption theory; Investment
theory; Determination of rate of interest; The IS-LM model in a
closed and open economy; Policy effect of IS-LM model in
closed and open economy; The AD-AS model; Monetarist mod-
el; Models of inflation, output and unemployment; Rational Ex-
pectations and New Classical Macroeconomics; Real Business
Cycle theory (Real Business Cycle and Inter-temporal substitu-
tion of labor, Technology Shock, Neutrality of money and flexibil-
ity of wages and prices, Real Business cycle view on great de-
pression); New Keynesian Theory (Imperfect competition and
price setting, Menu cost models, implicit wage contract theory,
efficiency wage theory, Insider-Outsider model); The Solow
growth model; Infinite-horizon and Overlapping generation mod-
el (The Ramsey-CassKoopman Model, The diamond model);
Endogenous growth model; Optimal Macroeconomic Policy; Fi-
nancial Frictions; House Prices; Unconventional Monetary Poli-
cy; Pandemic and Macroeconomic Policy.
ECON G548 Topics in Mathematical Economics 4
Metric Spaces; Set properties- compactness, convexity, con-
nected; Equivalence relations of a set; Functions- concave,
convex, quasiconcave, homogeneity, homotheticity; Economic
applications and implications of these; Fixed point theorems and
applications; Geometry of matrices; Quadratic forms; Solutions
to system of equations; Partitioned matrices; Characteristic roots
and vectors; Vector and matrix differentiation; Definiteness of
matrices; Generalized eigenvalues and eigenvectors; Applica-
tions of linear independence; Input-Output matrices; Static Opti-
misation- constraint and unconstrained optimization, Equality
constraints, Inequality constraints, Kuhn-Tucker theorem, Con-
cave Programming without differentiability, Multipliers, Value
functions, Comparative statics; Dynamic Optimisation- Autono-
mous systems- asymptotic behavior, steady states and stability,
calculus of variations, Bellman's equation, Optimal control theo-
ry, Discounting, Phase diagram, Multi-period optimal investment
models, Multi-period optimal consumption models.
ECON G549 Topics in Microeconomics 4
Preferences & Utility; Intertemporal Consumption Analysis; Wel-
fare Analysis; Empirical Issues; Behavioural Developments;
Modelling Household Behaviour; Uncertainty and Risk; Model-
ling Risk Aversion; Anomalies and Way Forward; Financial Mar-
kets; Firm’s Behaviour; Pricing Theory; General Equilibrium;
Welfare Theorems; Comparative Analysis of Different Market
Structures; Externality; Public Goods; Coase Theorem; Endow-
ment Effects; Adverse Selection and Moral Hazard; Asymmetric
Information Issues in Banking Sector; Asymmetric Information
Issues in Policy Implementation; Auctions.
Electronics and Computer Engineering
ECOM F211 Data Structures & Algorithms 3 1 4
Introduction to Abstract Data Types, Data structures and Algo-
rithms; Analysis of Algorithms – Time and Space Complexity,
Complexity Notation, Solving Recurrence Relations.; Divide-and-
Conquer as a Design Technique; Recursion – Recursive Data
Types, Design of Recursive Functions / Procedures, Tail Recur-
sion, Conversion of Recursive Functions to Iterative Form. Line-
ar data structures – Lists, Access Restricted Lists (Stacks and
Queues); Searching and Order Queries. Sorting – Sorting Algo-
rithms (Online vs. Offline, In-memory vs. External, In-space vs.
Out-of-space, Quick Sort and Randomization), Lower Bound on
Complexity of Sorting Algorithms. Unordered Collections: Hash
tables (Separate Chaining vs. Open Addressing, Probing, Re-
hashing). Binary Trees – Tree Traversals. Partially Ordered Col-
lections: Search Trees and Height Balanced Search Trees,
Heaps and Priority Queues. Probabilistic/Randomized Data
Structures (such as Bloom Filters and Splay Trees). Generalized
Trees – Traversals and applications. Text Processing – Basic
I-49
Algorithms and Data Structures (e.g. Tries, Huffman Coding,
String search / pattern matching). External Memory Data struc-
tures (B-Trees and variants). Graphs and Graph Algorithms:
Representation schemes, Problems on Directed Graphs
(Reachability and Strong Connectivity, Traversals, Transitive
Closure. Directed Acyclic Graphs - Topological Sorting), Prob-
lems on Weighted Graphs (Shortest Paths. Spanning Trees).
Equivalent: CS F211 & IS F211: Data Structures & Algorithms
ECOM F213 Object Oriented Programming 3 1 4
Object orientation concepts, theories and principles; fundamen-
tal concepts of the object model: classes, objects, methods and
messages, encapsulation and inheritance, interface and imple-
mentation, reuse and extension of classes, inheritance and pol-
ymorphism; overloading and overriding; static and dynamic bind-
ing; multithreaded programming; event handling and exception
handling; process of object-oriented requirements specification,
analysis and design; notations for object-oriented analysis and
design; case studies and applications using some object-
oriented programming languages. Object Oriented Design Pat-
terns: Behavioural, Structural and Creational.
Equivalent: CS F213 & IS F213: Object Oriented Programming
ECOM F214 Electronic Devices 3 0 3
Crystal structure and growth of semiconductor, electrical con-
duction in solids, Elementary quantum physics (Photoelectric ef-
fect, uncertainty principle, Schrodinger wave equation and tun-
neling), energy bands in solids, charge carriers in semiconduc-
tors, excess carriers in semiconductors, Fabrication of p-n junc-
tions, equilibrium conditions, forward and reverse biased junc-
tions, metal-semiconductor junctions Bipolar junction transistors,
field effect transistors (JFET, HEMT, MOSFET), Special diodes
(varactor diode, solar cell, LEDs, Tunnel diode and HBT), dielec-
tric materials and insulation (Polarization mechanisms, frequen-
cy dependence, dielectric strength and insulation breakdown).
Equivalent: EEE F214, INSTR F214 &ECE F214 : Electronic
Devices
ECOM F215 Digital Design 3 1 4
Boolean Algebra & logic minimization; combinational logic cir-
cuits : arithmetic circuit design , Design using MSI components;
Sequential Logic Circuits : flip flops & latches, registers and
counters, Finite state machine ; HDL Implementation of Digital
circuits; Digital Integrated Circuits ; Programmable logic devices;
Memory organization ; Algorithmic State machine; Introduction to
computer organization; The course will also have laboratory
component on digital design.
Equivalent: CS F215, ECE F215, EEE F215 & INSTR F215:
Digital Design
ECOM F222 Discrete Structures for Computer Science 3 0 3
Sets & operation on sets; relations & equivalence relations;
number theory; weak & strong form of mathematical induction;
principle of inclusion & exclusion, pigeonhole principle; recur-
rence relations & generating functions; digraphs & graphs, graph
isomorphism & sub-graphs, spanning trees, Euler & Hamiltonian
graphs, planar graphs, chromatic numbers & graph coloring;
groups; Lagrange theorem finite groups; Rings & Fields.
Equivalent: CS F222 & IS F222: Discrete structures for Com-
puter Science
ECOM F241 Microprocessors and Interfacing 3 1 4
Programmers model of processor, processor architecture; In-
struction set, modular assembly programming using subroutines,
macros etc.; Timing diagrams ; Concept of interrupts: hardware
& software interrupts, Interrupt handling techniques, Interrupt
controllers; Types of Memory & memory interfacing; Program-
mable Peripheral devices and I/O Interfacing ; DMA controller
and its interfacing: Design of processor based system. This
course will have laboratory component.
Equivalent: CS F241, ECE F241, EEE F241 & INSTR F241:
Microprocessors and Interfacing
ECOM F242 Control Systems 3 0 3
Modeling and classification of dynamical systems, Properties
and advantages of feedback systems, time-domain analysis,
frequency-domain analysis, stability and performance analysis,
State space analysis, controller design.
VI
Equivalent: ECE F242, EEE F242 & INSTR F242: Control Sys-
tems
ECOM F243 Signals and Systems 3 0 3
This course is intended to provide a comprehensive coverage of
Signals and Systems, a fundamental subject of Electrical Engi-
neering. The topics covered are: Continuous-time and discrete
time signals and systems, convolution, properties of linear time-
invariant (LTI) systems, Fourier series, Fourier transform, Z
transform, Laplace transform; System analysis, frequency re-
sponse, analog filters, Sampling and reconstruction.
Equivalent: ECE F243, EEE F243 & INSTR F243: Signals and
Systems
ECOM F244 Microelectronic Circuits 3 0 3
Basic microelectronic circuit analysis and design, biasing in dis-
crete and integrated circuit amplifiers, an overview of modeling
of microelectronic devices single and two transistor amplifier
configurations with passive and active loads; current mirrors &
current sources; single-ended and differential linear amplifiers ,
differential and multistage amplifiers; 2 stage CMOS OPAMP,
frequency response of amplifiers; negative feedback in amplifi-
ers, R-C frequency compensation.
Equivalent: ECE F244, EEE F244 & INSTR F244: Microelec-
tronic Circuits
ECOM F266 Study Project 3
These courses include projects which are oriented towards read-
ings from published literature or books about new frontiers of
development or analysis of available database. These courses
are normally available to students in second or higher levels.
These courses must coterminate with project reports.
ECOM F313 Analog & Digital VLSI Design 3 0 3
Moore’s Law, Y chart, MOS device models including Deep Sub-
Micron effects; an overview of fabrication of CMOS circuits, par-
asitic capacitances, MOS scaling techniques, latch up, matching
issues, common centroid geometries in layout. Digital circuit de-
sign styles for logic, arithmetic and sequential blocks design; de-
vice sizing using logical effort; timing issues (clock skew and jit-
ter) and clock distribution techniques; estimation and minimiza-
tion of energy consumption; Power delay trade-off, interconnect
modelling; memory architectures, memory circuits design, sense
amplifiers; an overview of testing of integrated circuits. Basic and
cascaded NMOS/PMOS/CMOS gain stages, Differential amplifi-
er and advanced OPAMP design , matching of devices, mis-
match analysis, CMRR, PSRR and slew rate issues, offset volt-
age , advanced current mirrors; current and voltage references
design, common mode feedback circuits, Frequency response,
stabilty and noise issues in amplifiers; frequency compensation
techniques.
Equivalent: EEE F313 & INSTR F313: Analog & Digital VLSI
Design
ECOM F321 Real Time Operating Systems 3 1 4
Introduction to Real-Time Systems, Overview of General Pur-
pose Operating Systems, Real-Time Systems – Hardware Com-
ponents, Real-Time Operating Systems, Task Scheduling for
RTOS, Resource Sharing and Access Control in RTOS, Concur-
rent Programming in RTOS, Fault Tolerance in Real Time Oper-
ating Systems.
Pre-requisites: CS F111: Computer Programming
ECOM F342 Computer Architecture 3 1 4
Processor performance criteria, performance benchmarks,
arithmetic circuits, CPU design - instruction set architecture, in-
struction execution, Single and Multicycle implementation, Pipe-
line design, Hazards, methods of overcoming hazards, Branch
prediction, Memory subsystems including cache optimization,
Instruction level Parallelism.
Equivalent: CS F342: Computer Architecture
ECOM F343 Communication Networks 3 0 3
Packet switching and circuit switching; layered network architec-
ture (OSI model), point-to-point protocols and links: physical lay-
er, error detection and correction, ARQ retransmission strategy,
framing, X.25 standard, queueing theory and delay analysis: Lit-
tle’s theorem, analytical treatment of M/M/1 and M/M/m queuing
I-50
systems, simulation of queueing systems, delay analysis for
ARQ system, multi-access protocols and techniques: Aloha sys-
tems, CSMA, IEEE-802 standards, routing and flow control.
TCP/ IP protocols, ISDN, ATM, network security, design of a
LAN system with commercially available functional units. Wire-
less LAN: adhoc network, security issues.
Equivalent: ECE F343: Communication Networks
ECOM F366 Lab Project 3
ECOM 367 Lab Project 3
These courses include projects involving laboratory investigation
or laboratory development in the students discipline or interdis-
ciplinary areas. These courses are normally available to stu-
dents in third or higher levels. These courses must coterminate
with project reports.
ECOM F376 Design Project 3
ECOM F377 Design Project 3
These courses are intended to impart training in design of prod-
uct/ process or other artifact to the students in the discipline or
interdisciplinary areas. These courses are normally available to
students in third or higher levels. These courses must cotermi-
nate with project reports.
ECOM F462 Network Programming 3 0 3
Overview of computer networks; inter-process communication;
network programming; socket interface; client-server computing
model: design issues, concurrency in server and clients; external
data representation; remote procedure calls; network file sys-
tems; distributed systems design.
Equivalent: IS F462: Network Programming
ECOM F491 Special Project 3
This is an unstructured open-ended course where under the
overall supervision of an instructor-in-charge, batches of stu-
dents will be attached to different instructors. Each batch will
work on a specific time-bound project which is of basic or pe-
ripheral concern of his discipline. Each student must submit a
project report as a culmination of his endeavour and investiga-
tion. The instructor- in-charge will determine the choice of the
project and also whether or not the project report is to be submit-
ted jointly by a group or individually by a student. The course will
aim to evaluate student's actual ability to use the fundamentals
of knowledge and to meet new unknown situations as demon-
strated by the students' interaction with the instructors and in-
structor-in- charge and aggregated in the project report. The in-
structor-in- charge may assign specific hours for formal brain-
storming sessions.
Environmental Engineering
EE G501 Environmental Sampling and Analytical 3 2 5
Methods
Principles of sample collection and data analysis / interpretation,
Gravimetric methods, titrimetric methods, electrochemical meth-
ods, Spectrometric methods of analysis, Chromatographic
methods of analysis, Sampling techniques for air and water pol-
lution, Biological methods of analysis, Interpretation of data in
environmental monitoring
EE G502 Water and Wastewater Treatment Systems 3 2 5
Introduction to water management. Water quality Management
and; Assessment: Water and wastewater sources and character-
istics, Water quality and effluent standards, Issues related to wa-
ter supply and disposal of wastewater, General considerations
for the source of water for different beneficial uses. Fundamen-
tals of water and wastewater treatment: Water and wastewater
collection systems. Considerations for the layout of the treatment
plant. Unit operations in water and wastewater treatment plants.
Design criteria for units in water and wastewater treatment
plants: preliminary, primary, secondary and tertiary treatment
units. Household and Small-scale Treatment Systems. Construc-
tion and operation of water and wastewater treatment plants.
Sustainability Principles in Water Management.
EE G503 Environmental Systems Modelling 3 2 5
Introduction to air quality models, Atmospheric stability and tur-
bulence, Gaussian dispersion models, single source and multi-
source models, Transport and fate of pollutant in aquatic sys-
VI
tems, Introduction to modeling of river, lake and estuarine hy-
drodynamics, Stratification and eutrophication of water bodies,
Dissolved oxygen model for water streams, Computational
methods in environmental modeling and simulation, Transport
and fate of pollutants in soils and ground water, Applications of
public domain models and software; Case studies.
EE G504 Physico Chemical Treatment Principles and 3 2 5
Design of Wastewater Treatment Systems
Pollutant classification, Source selection process, Selection of
treatment chain, Plant siting, Physical treatment methods like
screening, sedimentation, filteration, etc., Chemical treatment
principles like precipitation, coagulation, ozonation etc., adsorp-
tion, Novel processes like membranes, electrodialysis, etc., De-
sign of physico-chemical systems for wastewater treatment,
Case studies.
EE G505 Biological Treatment Principles and Design 3 2 5
of Wastewater Treatment Systems
Fundamentals of biological treatment, Biochemistry and kinetics
of biochemical processes like oxidation, nitrification & denitirifica-
tion, Dephosphatization, Acedogensis and methogenasis, Aero-
bic and anaerobic treatment processes, Basic description of
equipment and design methodologies, Design of reactors and
configurations; Case studies for industrial and wastewater treat-
ment.
EE G506 Environmental Statistics 3 2 5
Introduction to probability and Statistics, Probability concepts
and probability distributions, Fundamentals of data analysis, Un-
certainty in Measurement, Precision and accuracy, Reproducibil-
ity/repeatability, Types of errors, Error propagation, Confidence
intervals, Hypothesis testing for equality of mean and standard
deviation: t-test, chi-square test and F-test, Errors in hypothesis
testing, Experiment design and analysis of variances, Autocorre-
lation, crosscorrelation and sensitivity analysis in data sets, Lin-
ear leastsquares regression. Precision of parameter estimates,
Coefficient of determination; Interpreting statistical results, doc-
umentation and recommendations, Theory of attributes, Time
series analysis, Case studies.
EE G507 Industrial Pollution Abatement 5*
Different types of wastes generated in an industry, their effects
on living and non-living things; environmental regulatory legisla-
tions and standards and climate changes; quantification and
analysis of wastewater and treatment; different unit operations
and unit processes involved in conversion of highly polluted wa-
ter to potable standards; atmospheric dispersion of air pollutants,
and operating principles, design calculations of particulate con-
trol devices; analysis and quantification of hazardous and non-
hazardous solid wastes, treatment and disposal.
EE G508 Urban Water Management 5*
The urban water cycle (description, social imperatives, environ-
mental considerations, and economic challenges); water supply
(availability, service levels, and technical options); free basic wa-
ter, demand management, loss control, use of recycled water;
sewage (public health considerations, service levels and tech-
nical options, the dryversus-wet sanitation debate, social ac-
ceptance, and grey water management); drainage (service lev-
els and technical options, sustainable urban drainage systems
(SUDS), urban litter management, urban rivers, risk manage-
ment, and groundwater issues); management (water sensitive
urban design, introduction to asset management, GIS as a water
management tool, and sustainability indicators).
EE G601 Energy Generation and Management in 3 2 5
Waste Treatment Plants
Energy audit and minimization in waste treatment facilities; Nov-
el energy conservation technologies, Estimation of energy po-
tential of waste; Selection of energy generation technologies
coupled with waste treatment, e.g. incinerators, pyrolysis units,
bio-digesters and purification and enrichment of off gases from
these units; Utilization of fuel &fertilizer value of gases & liquids
from bio-digesters and pyrolysis units; Energy generation from
waste sludge.
EE G602 Environmental Remote Sensing and GIS 3 2 5
Principles of remote sensing, Components of GIS: Hardware,
I-51
Software and Organization Context, Types of Maps; Spatial and
Non Spatial, Types of Projections, Editing the Raster and Vector
data structures, Analysis using raster and Vector Data, Data Re-
trieval, Data Reclassification, Data Overlaying and Buffering; Da-
ta Output; Pollution data gathering in GIS area under considera-
tion through terrestrial and aerial stations, unmanned aerial ve-
hicles (UAV) equipped with imaging and spectroscopic probes;
Pollution mapping coupled to GIS through wireless network; Wa-
ter body pollution monitoring instruments coupled to GIS through
wireless network, Thermal and microwave remote sensing,
Space imaging, Case studies on various applications of GIS for
environmental management.
EE G603 Air Pollution Control Technologies 3 2 5
Introduction to air pollution, Atmospheric diffusion of air pollu-
tants, Particulate control, Gaseous pollutant control, Methods for
monitoring and control, Selection and design of control equip-
ments, Meteorological aspects of air pollution, Applications and
case studies.
EE G604 Solid Waste Management 3 2 5
Introduction to solid waste management: Sources and classifica-
tion, Composition and Properties of Solid Waste and emerging
e-waste, Onsite handling, storage and processing including seg-
regation, Collection of solid waste, Transfer and transport, Recy-
cling, Incineration pyrolysis and composting, Processing tech-
nique and equipment, Recovery of resources, conversion prod-
ucts, and energy, Biomedical and hazardous waste, Electronic
waste, Regulatory framework, categorization, generation, collec-
tion, transport, treatment and disposal, Leacheate collection and
treatment, Bioleaching and bioremediation; Case studies.
EE G605 Environmental Process Engineering 3 2 5
Origin, Nature and composition of solid, liquid and gaseous
emissions from various processes in Industries, institutions and
human habitats, Assessment of pollution potential through study
of process chemistry and process engineering, Understanding
block flow diagrams (BFD), Process Flow Diagrams (PFD) and
Piping and Instrumentation Diagram (P&ID) and Process Pollu-
tion Flow Diagram (PPFD), Maximum Attainable Control Tech-
nologies (MACT) and Best Available Control Technologies
(BACT), Reasonably Available Control Technology (RACT) and
Lowest Attainable Emission Rate (LAER), List of equipment and
processes for BACT/RACT/LAER and their description, Estimat-
ing thermophysical and thermodynamic data for pollutants, Use
of software in Environmental Process Engineering Equipment
design and datasheet generation, Technical audit of Existing
process technology, Environmental carrying capacity calcula-
tions; Interpretation of field/on-site and laboratory data, Case
studies.
EE G606 Environmental Impact and Risk Assessment 3 2 5
Introduction to Environmental Impact Assessment (EIA), Envi-
ronmental assessment framework, Impact assessment method-
ologies; Air and water quality Impact analysis (AQIA / WQIA),
Energy and noise impact analysis (EnIA / NIA), Vegetation, wild
life and socio-impact analysis, Environment risk assessment,
Environmental Impact statement.
Electrical and Electronics Engineering
EEE F111 Electrical Sciences 3 0 3
Course covers basic passive circuit elements, dependent and
independent sources, network theorems, circuit analysis tech-
niques and response of first and second order circuits. Introduc-
tion to three - phase circuits, magnetic circuits, transformers, ba-
sics of rotating machines. Semiconductors - operation of diodes,
zener diodes, bipolar junction transistors and field effect transis-
tors. Biasing techniques and applications of diodes and transis-
tors. Introduction to operational amplifiers and applications. In-
troduction to Digital Electronics.
EEE F211 Electrical Machines 3 1 4
Transformer: Constructional features, equivalent circuit and
phasor diagram - regulation and efficiency, parallel operation.
Three phase transformer connections; Harmonic in transformers;
Testing; Phase conversion; Autotransformer. D.C Machines:
Construction, armature windings, armature voltage and torque
equations, classification. D.C generators, performance charac-
teristics; D.C motors - torque/speed characteristics, speed con-
VI
trol and braking. Testing and efficiency. Induction machines:
Constructional features and rotating magnetic field. Circuit model
and phasor diagram.
Steady state characteristics. Testing, starting and speed control.
Time harmonics and space harmonics. Wound rotor induction
motors, Single phase induction motors - classification and
equivalent circuit. Synchronous machines: Constructional fea-
tures; synchronous generators and motors; equivalent circuit
and phasor diagram; power and torque characteristics and ca-
pability curves. Parallel operation. Salient pole synchronous ma-
chine - phasor diagram and determination of synchronous reac-
tances; starting and speed control of synchronous motors. Spe-
cial machines- universal motors, Induction generators.
EEE F212 Electromagnetic Theory 3 0 3
Review of mathematics - scalar and vector fields, calculus of
scalar and vector fields in Cartesian and curvilinear coordinates,
Dirac delta function; Electrostatics - electric field, divergence &
curl of e(cid:10) lectric field, electric potential, work and energy in elec-
trostatics, conductors, electric dipole; Electrostatics in Matter -
polarization and field of a polarized object, electric displacement,
linear dielectrics; Magnetostatics - Lorentz force law, Biot-Savart
law, divergence & curl of magnetic field, magnetic vector poten-
tial, magnetic dipole; Magnetostatics in matter - magnetization
and field of a magnetized object, the H-field, linear & non-linear
magnetic media; Electrodynamics - electromotive force, electro-
magnetic induction, Maxwell's equations in free space, plane
wave solutions of Maxwell’s equations in free space.
EEE F214 Electronic Devices 3 0 3
Crystal structure and growth of semiconductor, electrical con-
duction in solids, Elementary quantum physics (Photoelectric ef-
fect, uncertainty principle, Schrodinger wave equation and tun-
neling), energy bands in solids, charge carriers in semiconduc-
tors, excess carriers in semiconductors, Fabrication of p-n junc-
tions, equilibrium conditions, forward and reverse biased junc-
tions, metal-semiconductor junctions Bipolar junction transistors,
field effect transistors (JFET, HEMT, MOSFET), Special diodes
(varactor diode, solar cell, LEDs, Tunnel diode and HBT), dielec-
tric materials and insulation (Polarization mechanisms, frequen-
cy dependence, dielectric strength and insulation breakdown).
EEE F215 Digital Design 3 1 4
Boolean Algebra & logic minimization; combinational logic cir-
cuits : arithmetic circuit design , Design using MSI components;
Sequential Logic Circuits : flip flops & latches, registers and
counters, Finite state machine ; HDL Implementation of Digital
circuits; Digital Integrated Circuits ; Programmable logic devices;
Memory organization ; Algorithmic State machine; Introduction to
computer organization; The course will also have laboratory
component on digital design.
EEE F216 Electronic Devices Simulation Laboratory 0 2 2
Hands on simulation experience of Electronic Devices (Diodes,
BJTs, MOSFET and MOS Capacitor) using Sentarus TCAD;
Simulation of electrostatics of various Electronic Devices and
their effects on the device performance.
Pre-requisites:
EEE F214 / INSTR F214 / ECE F214 : Electronic Devices
EEE F241 Microprocessors and Interfacing 3 1 4
Programmers model of processor, processor architecture; In-
struction set, modular assembly programming using subroutines,
macros etc.; Timing diagrams ; Concept of interrupts: hardware
& software interrupts, Interrupt handling techniques, Interrupt
controllers; Types of Memory & memory interfacing; Program-
mable Peripheral devices and I/O Interfacing ; DMA controller
and its interfacing: Design of processor based system. This
course will have laboratory component.
EEE F242 Control Systems 3 0 3
Modeling and classification of dynamical systems, Properties
and advantages of feedback systems, time-domain analysis,
frequency-domain analysis, stability and performance analysis,
State space analysis, controller design.
EEE F243 Signals & Systems 3 0 3
This course is intended to provide a comprehensive coverage of
Signals and Systems, a fundamental subject of Electrical Engi-
I-52
neering. The topics covered are: Continuous-time and discrete
time signals and systems, convolution, properties of linear time-
invariant (LTI) systems, Fourier series, Fourier transform, Z
transform, Laplace transform; System analysis, frequency re-
sponse, analog filters, Sampling and reconstruction.
EEE F244 Microelectronic Circuits 3 0 3
Basic microelectronic circuit analysis and design, biasing in dis-
crete and integrated circuit amplifiers, an overview of modeling
of microelectronic devices single and two transistor amplifier
configurations with passive and active loads; current mirrors &
current sources; single-ended and differential linear amplifiers ,
differential and multistage amplifiers; 2 stage CMOS OPAMP,
frequency response of amplifiers; negative feedback in amplifi-
ers, R-C frequency compensation.
EEE F245 Control System Laboratory 0 1 1
Experiments and simulations on concepts related to convention-
al and advanced control systems.
EEE F246 Electrical and Electronic Circuits Laborato- 0 2 2
ry
Experiments in Electrical sciences, Electronic devices, motors,
transformer windings, machine windings, electronic circuits and
signals, systems etc.
EEE F266 Study Project 3
These courses include projects which are oriented towards read-
ings from published literature or books about new frontiers of
development or analysis of available database. These courses
are normally available to students in second or higher levels.
These courses must coterminate with project reports.
EEE F311 Communication Systems 3 1 4
Analysis and design of communication systems; analog and digi-
tal modulation and demodulation, frequency conversion, multi-
plexing, noise and distortion; spectral and signal-to-noise ratio
analysis, probability of error in digital systems, spread spec-
trum.Introduction to the basic principles of the design and analy-
sis of modern digital communication systems. Topics include
source coding, channel coding, baseband and passband modu-
lation techniques, receiver design, and channel equalization.
EEE F312 Power Systems 3 0 3
Review and importance of power system, Present power system
scenario, Transmission line parameters and modeling, Charac-
teristics and performance of lines, Load flow studies, Optimal
system operation, Automatic Generation and voltage Control,
Power system fault analysis, Power Systems stability, Introduc-
tion of power system protection, Introduction of HVDC Trans-
mission.
EEE F313 Analog & Digital VLSI Design 3 0 3
Moore’s Law, Y chart, MOS device models including Deep Sub-
Micron effects; an overview of fabrication of CMOS circuits, par-
asitic capacitances, MOS scaling techniques, latch up, matching
issues, common centroid geometries in layout. Digital circuit de-
sign styles for logic, arithmetic and sequential blocks design; de-
vice sizing using logical effort; timing issues (clock skew and jit-
ter) and clock distribution techniques; estimation and minimiza-
tion of energy consumption; Power delay trade-off, interconnect
modelling; memory architectures, memory circuits design, sense
amplifiers; an overview of testing of integrated circuits. Basic and
cascaded NMOS/PMOS/CMOS gain stages, Differential amplifi-
er and advanced OPAMP design , matching of devices, mis-
match analysis, CMRR, PSRR and slew rate issues, offset volt-
age , advanced current mirrors; current and voltage references
design, common mode feedback circuits, Frequency response,
stabilty and noise issues in amplifiers; frequency compensation
techniques.
EEE F341 Analog Electronics 3 1 4
Introduction to operational amplifiers: The difference amplifier
and the ideal operational amplifier models, concept of negative
feedback and virtual short; Analysis of simple operational ampli-
fier circuits; Effects of real operational amplifier parameters on
circuit performance . Linear applications of operational amplifi-
ers: Instrumentation and Isolation amplifiers; Current and volt-
VI
age sources; Active filters. Non-linear applications of opera-
tional amplifiers: Comparators,; Linearization amplifiers; Loga-
rithmic amplifiers, multifunction modules & circuits, true rms con-
vertors, Precision and signal conditioning circuits, Waveform
Generation: sinusoidal and non-sinusoidal signal generation;
Wave shape converters. Timer 555 based circuits, Phase lock
loop circuits & applications, IC regulators, Output stage and
large signal amplifiers, Power amplifiers, Tuned amplifiers, Ana-
log and Digital interface circuits: A/D, D/A Converters.
EEE F342 Power Electronics 3 1 4
Need for power conversion; Power electronic converters: classi-
fications and scope; Power semiconductor switches: diodes,
SCR , GTO and transistors (BJT, MOSFET and IGBT): Ratings,
static and dynamic characteristics, drive and switching aid cir-
cuits and cooling; DC to DC conversion: Buck, Boost and Buck-
Boost converters: circuit configuration and analysis with different
kinds of loads; Choppers: single quadrant and two quadrant op-
eration with DC motor load and steady state analysis; Rectifiers:
single phase and three phase operation, power factor, harmon-
ics and effect of source inductance; Dual converters; Drive con-
cept: Four quadrant drive and load characteristics, selection of
motor, control and stability of electric drives, feed back control of
drives; DC motor drive; Inverters: single phase and three phase
bridge inverters and PWM inverters; Single phase AC voltage
regulators and cycloconverter; Induction motor drive - Variable
frequency operation of 3-phase induction motor, stator voltage
control and V/f control methods; Non-drive application of power
electronic converters: UPS, active power line conditioner, elec-
tronic ballast and induction.
EEE F345 Power Apparatus & Networks 3 0 3
Essential fundamentals of power networks: overview of power
systems and changing landscape; sources of electrical energy
and environmental consequences; the Indian power industry;
fundamental principles of power networks; magnetic prerequi-
sites. Apparatus in power networks: transformers; synchronous
generators; transmission lines, cables, HVDC; loads and power
quality. Analysis and operation: power flow; rotor angle and volt-
age stability; control of large interconnected power networks.
Protection: fault calculations, relay co-ordination and circuit
breakers; transient overvoltages, protection by surge arrestors,
and insulation co-ordination. Management of vertical utilities, util-
ity deregulation and open access: operational economics of the
power industry, privatization; deregulation and energy markets.
EEE F346 Data Communication Networks 2 0 2
Communication Concepts; Data and Voice Communications;
Hardware Systems and Configurations; Network Topologies and
Design Aspects; Protocols; Networking Software; Local Area
Networks; Network Security and Management; Emerging Trends
in Communications.
EEE F347 Communication Networks Laboratory 0 2 2
Experiments on analytical studies of communication networks
through network simulation, analysis of network performance,
LANs, Cellular or Satellite networks, Wireless Adhoc or Sensor
Networks, Wi-Fi and WIMAX networks, information theory and
coding etc.
EEE F348 FPGA Based System Design Laboratory 0 2 2
Introduction to Field Programmable Gate Arrays, Overview of
FPGA design tools, Implementation of Data Flow Graph in
FPGA, Analysis of performance tradeoffs (Pipelining, Retiming,
Unfolding), Bus protocols (SPI, I2C), FPGA based DSP System
Design , ADC/DAC interface, Real time signal processing sys-
tem design.
EEE F366 Lab Project 3
EEE F367 Lab Project 3
These courses include projects involving laboratory investigation
or laboratory development in the students discipline or interdis-
ciplinary areas. These courses are normally available to stu-
dents in third or higher levels. These courses must coterminate
with project reports.
EEE F376 Design Project 3
EEE F377 Design Project 3
These courses are intended to impart training in design of prod-
I-53
uct/ process or other artifact to the students in the discipline or
interdisciplinary areas. These courses are normally available to
students in third or higher levels. These courses must cotermi-
nate with project reports.
EEE F411 Internet of Things 3 1 4
Introduction to IoT, Sensors and Actuators for IoT,Programming
IoT end points, Communications andnetworking in IoT, Data
management in IoT, Securityissues in IoT, Emerging technolo-
gies.
EEE F414 Telecommunication Switching Systems & 3 0 3
Networks
Intoduction, electromechanical switching, pulse dialing and
DTMF dialing, stored program control, space division switching,
speech digitization and transmission, time division switching,
fundamentals of traffic engineering, telephone networks, signal-
ing, data networks, layered architecture and protocols, LANs,
packet switching networks, TCP/IP, ISDN, ATM networks.
EEE F416 Digital Communication 3 0 3
Introduction, the modeling and characterization of information
sources, algorithms for source coding and encoding of analog
output sources; Information transmission through AWGN chan-
nels using digital modulation methods and BER estimation; Digi-
tal communication through band limited Gaussian noise chan-
nels; channel coding and decoding; Wireless communication
channels: its characterization and modulation schemes for such
channels; emerging trends in the above field.
EEE F417 Computer Based Control Systems 3 0 3
Introduction to process control and Computer based control, el-
ements of computer based control loop, digital sensors and their
applications, field buses and specifications, types of digital and
intelligent controllers, types of industrial control valves and their
selections, PID vs Fuzzy and Neural Techniques of control, pro-
grammable logic controllers, SCADA and its applications, dis-
tributed ontrol systems comparison between PLC, DCS, Fuzzy.
ANN, industrial network hierarchy, industrial standards for net-
working, application of PLC in power system and process indus-
tries.
EEE F418 Modern Communication Technologies 3 0 3
Modern communication systems overview, Digital modulation
techniques, Channel capacity and coding, Digital link improve
techniques, Digital receiver design and performance analysis,
Wireless communication systems: wireless channel models and
link improvement techniques, multiple access schemes. Basic
concept of mobile network, Optical Communication Systems:
Transmitters, receivers and other optical Communication sub-
system, Optical wireless systems.
EEE F419 Flexible and Stretchable Electronics 3 1 4
Introduction to flexible and stretchable electronics (FSE), materi-
al systems and scaling issues; materials and substrates for flexi-
ble and printed electronics, Material Considerations and various
properties, techniques for fabrication and characterization of
FSE devices, mechanics of thin-films and flexible devices, vari-
ous flexible and stretchable devices: solar cells, displays, thin-
film transistors, sensors, artificial skin and actuators; human-
machine interfaces, wearable electronics for emerging applica-
tions.
Pre-requisite: EEE/INSTR/ECE F214: Electronic Devices
EEE F420 Biomedical Signal Processing 3 1 4
Introduction to biomedical signals and images, fundamental and
advanced filtering techniques for artifacts removal, event detec-
tion, feature extraction of the biomedical signals, Homophorphic
filtering, modeling biomedical signals and systems using pole-
zero modeling and all-pole modeling, cochlear signal processing,
deep learning and stochastic decision-making approach for di-
agnostic decisions, various case studies of biomedical signals
for artifact removal and event detection will be discussed.
Pre-requisite: EEE F434 or ECE F434 : Digital Signal Pro-
cessing
EEE F422 Modern Control Systems 3 0 3
State variable characterization of linear continuous - time and
discrete - time systems, controllability, observability, stability;
VI
sampled data systems; Z transforms; non-linear systems; phase
plane and describing function methods; calculus of variations;
optimal control.
EEE F423 Electronic Material Design and Simulations 1 2 3
Laboratory
Reviewing the basic Theory for Crystalline Solids (Crystal group,
real Space, reciprocal space), Introduction of the Concept of
Density Functional Theory (Many Electron Scenario, Born-
Oppenheimer Approximation, Hartree’s Formulation, Hohenberg
and Kohn Theorems, Energy Functional, Kohn Sham Scheme),
Familiarization with Quantum Espresso (Plane Wave Basis Set,
Exchange Correlation Functional, Pseudopotential, Brillouin
Zone Sampling, Quantum Espresso input file format), Theoreti-
cal Calculation of Structural Properties of Materials (Unit Cells
and Super Cells, Lattice Vectors, Ground-state Energy, Bond-
Length and Bond Angles), Theoretical Calculation of Electronic
Properties of Materials (Energy Band Profiles and Density of
States, Projected Density of States), Theoretical Calculation of
Optical Properties of Materials (Optical Spectrum), Introduction
of Doping in Materials (Effects on Electronic and Optical Proper-
ties), Introduction of Strain in Materials (Effects on Electronic
and Optical Properties) Simulation of 2D materials like Graphene
and MoS2.
Pre-requisites:
EEE F214 / INSTR F214 / ECE F214 : Electronic Devices
EEE F424 Smart Grid for Sustainable Energy 3 0 3
Introduction to Smart grid, Renewable Power Generation and
Energy Storage, Microgrid, Power System Economics and Elec-
tricity Markets, Demand Response, Various Sensing, Communi-
cation, and Control technologies, and Application of Data Sci-
ence.
Pre-requisite:
EEE F242 / INSTR F242 / ECE F242 : Control Systems
EEE F425 Power System Analysis and Control 3 0 3
Course description is to be developed.
EEE F426 Fiber Optics & Optoelectronics 3 0 3
Theory of optical fibres; image transmission by fibres; technolo-
gy of fibre production; fibre testing; characterization of optical fi-
bres; detectors and sources for fibre optic systems; active fibres;
applications of optical fibres; optoelectronic devices and applica-
tions.
EEE F427 Electric Power Utilization and Illumina-3 0 3
tion
Introduction to industrial utilization of electric power, types of
drives, its characteristics, insulation materials used, Industrial
applications such as electric heating, welding etc.., traction sys-
tems, DC and AC systems of railway electrification, Train
movement and factors effecting Energy Consumption, Speed-
time curve, Tractive effort, Power of traction motors. Braking
systems, Regenerative braking, Mechanical braking, control
equipments. Illumination, laws of illumination, lighting calcula-
tion, interior and exterior illumination systems, design of various
lighting schemes, types of lamps, high or low pressure lamps
and discharge tubes.
EEE F428 Energy Storage Systems 3 0 3
Need of Energy Storage; Broad classification of Energy Storage
Systems and applications; Electrochemical Energy Storage Sys-
tems; Battery Storage; Application oriented choice of Batteries;
Electrical interface system design for Batteries with Renewable
Energy sources; Battery Management Systems (BMS); Hydro-
gen Energy Storage; Its application as Fuel cell, Electrical Ener-
gy Storage; Thermal Energy Storage; Mechanical Energy Stor-
age and their applications.
EEE F429 Smart Materials and Applications 3 1 4
Basics of Piezoelectric Materials, constitutive relationship, elec-
tromechanical coupling coefficients, piezoelectric constants, pol-
yvinyldene fluoride, piezoelectric composites and also design of
sensors & actuators using piezoelectric materials. Shape
Memory Alloys: Phase Transformations, Basic Material Behav-
iour, Properties of SMAs for Biomedical Applications, SMA
I-54
based actuators and sensors. Composition and properties of MR
fluid & ER fluids, applications of ER and MR fluids in active vi-
bration control and damping. Magnetrostrictive, Electrostrictive
materials, Magnetic Shape Memory Alloy, Ionic Polymer Metal
Composites and micro electro mechanical systems (MEMS) us-
ing smart materials.
EEE F430 Green Communications and Networks 3 0 3
Need for Green radios, Sustainable development goals (SDGs),
Historical developments, Fundamental trade-offs, Practical con-
straints, End-to-end green communication system, Energy har-
vesting (EH) components, Physical layer (PHY) of Green com-
munication network, Wireless power transfer (WPT), Simultane-
ous wireless information and power transfer (SWIPT), energy ef-
ficiency optimization of PHY, Green wireless network architec-
tures, green cooperative and spectrum sharing networks, Green
sensor networks, EH-Internet of things (EH-IoT), Energy-efficient
protocols, Big data management in green IoT, Introduction to
green UAVs, Current trends in green communication networks,
Game theory perspectives, Artificial intelligence (AI) uses for
green communications.
Pre-requisite:
EEE F311: Communication Systems
EEE F431 Mobile Telecommunication Networks 3 0 3
Fundamentals of mobile telecommunications, with an overview
of first generation (analog) systems and more detailed coverage
of second generation (digital) technologies; technology basics
including descriptions of wireless network elements, spectrum
allocation, frequency re-use, characteristics of the transmission
medium; over the-air (OTA) interface characteristics; capacity,
coverage, speech coding, channel coding and modulation tech-
niques of TDMA and CDMA technologies; network characteris-
tics; architecture, signaling, element management of IS-41 and
GSM networks; call processing; call setup and release, handoff,
roaming, advanced services; mobile data communications; cir-
cuit and packet switched data services, third generation (wide-
band data) mobile communications system requirements/ archi-
tecture.
EEE F432 Medical Instrumentation 3 0 3
Basic components of bio-medical instruments, bio-electric sig-
nals & recording electrodes, transducers, recording and display
devices. Patient care and monitoring systems, cardiovascular
measurements-blood pressure, blood flow, cardiac output, heart
sounds etc.; instrumentation for respiratory and nervous sys-
tems, analysis of EEG, ECG, EMG, EOG and action potentials,
non- invasive diagnostic measurements - temperature, ultrasonic
diagnosis, CAT scan techniques, sensory measurements-motor
response, analysis of behaviour etc. biotelemetry, biofeedback,
clinical laboratory instruments, X-ray diagnosis. Recent advanc-
es in biomedical instrumentation- microprocessor based sys-
tems, lasers & optical fiber based systems.
EEE F433 Electromagnetic Fields & Waves 3 0 3
Maxwell’s equations; application of circuit theory and field theo-
ry; Maxwell’s equations in free space and time varying fields;
plane waves in dielectric and conducting media; solution of wave
equations; the poynting vector; the poynting theorem; poynting
vector in conducting media and circuit application; wave polari-
zation; linear, elliptical and circular polarization; wave reflection,
refraction and diffraction; transmission lines and resonators;
Smith chart, and its applications in stub matching and imped-
ance matching; discontinuties; antennas and radiation; halfwave
dipole antenna; loop antenna; helical antenna; directive arrays;
frequency independent antennas; reflector and lens antennas;
horn antennas; antenna arrays; Friis formula; antenna practices
and antenna measurements.
EEE F434 Digital Signal Processing 3 1 4
Introduction; design of analog filters; design of digital filters ( IIR
and FIR); structures for the realization of digital filters; random
signals and random processes; linear estimation and prediction;
Wiener filters; DSP processor architecture; DSP algorithms for
different applications.
EEE F435 Digital Image Processing 3 0 3
Introduction to multidimensional signal processing-- 2-D convolu-
tion and filtering, discrete-time Fourier , filter design 2-D sam-
VI
pling and reconstruction transform, human visual system,
Brightness perception , Temporal properties of vision, 2-D Block
transforms-- Walsh-Hadamard, Karhunen Loeve, Discrete Hart-
ley, Filter Banks and Wavelets etc. , Image Compression , Im-
age Enhancement , Medical Image Processing , 3D techniques.
EEE F436 Electromagnetic Compatibility 3 1 4
Basic concepts of EMI/EMC – sources, units, coupling, issues
and regulation, Electrical signals and spectral properties, Time
and frequency relations, Measurement, Behavior of electrical
circuits, Self and mutual impedances, Transmission lines and
signal integrity, Non-ideal behavior of wires and lumped compo-
nents, Emission and Susceptibility –conducted and radiated,
Emission models – common mode and differential, Measure-
ment of emissions, System design for EMI, High speed circuit
boards, Electrostatic discharge, Cross-talk, Three conductor
transmission lines, Grounding, Shielding, Cabling, Filtering, De-
coupling, Other EMI related issues.
EEE F462 Advanced Power Systems 3 0 3
Symmetrical components, sequence impedances; fault calcula-
tions; short circuit studies; circuit breakers and their selections;
power system stability, power system protection--generators,
transformers and lines; waves on transmission lines, protective
devices -- grounded and ungrounded systems.
EEE F472 Satellite Communication 3 0 3
Review of microwave communications and LOS systems; the
various satellite orbits like GEO, MEO, LEO; the satellite link
analysis and design; the communication transponder system like
INSAT, INELSAT etc; the earth segment and earth station engi-
neering; the transmission of analog and digital signals through
satellite and various modulation techniques employed; the multi-
ple access techniques like FDMA, TDMA, CDMA, DAMA, etc;
the INSAT program; salient features of INSAT – systems and
services offered; satellite services offered by INTELSAT, IN-
MARSAT and future satellites like IRIDIUM etc; future trends in
satellite communications.
EEE F473 Wind Electrical Systems 3 0 3
Thermodynamics of wind energy, Types of Wind energy conver-
sion devices, Aerodynamics of wind rotors, design of wind tur-
bine rotor, Power -speed characteristics, torque-speed charac-
teristics, Wind turbine control systems, Wind speed measure-
ments , Wind speed statistics, Site and turbine selection, Induc-
tion Generators, Wound field synchronous Generator, Perma-
nent Magnet synchronous machine, Doubly fed induction gener-
ator, Power Flow equations, Power Semiconductor devices,
Converters, Inverters, power quality, Reactive power compensa-
tion, Wind diesel hybrid systems, Wind photovoltaic systems,
Role of Govt. and policies for market development.
EEE F474 Antenna Theory and Design 3 1 4
Introduction into antenna theory and practice, Radiation inte-
grals and auxiliary potential functions; basic EM theorems in an-
tenna problems, Antenna characteristics, Infinitesimal dipole;
wire and loop radiating elements, Wire antennas – dipoles,
monopoles, Arrays – analysis and design, Reflector antennas,
Broadband antennas, Micro-strip patch antennas , Smith Chart
Review in line with antenna theory and Design , Antenna meas-
urements, Antenna design using commercial software, study of
radiation pattern of various antennas.
EEE F475 Special Electrical Machines 3 1 4
Construction, principle of operation and performance of syn-
chronous reluctance motors, stepping motors, switched reluc-
tance motors, permanent magnet brushless D.C. mo-
tors, permanent magnet synchronous motors.
EEE F476 Switchgear and Protection 3 1 4
Working applications of various switchgears and protective ele-
ments. Switches and fuses, Elementary principles of Circuit
Breakers, Description and Operation of different types of circuit
breakers, Electromagnetic and Static Relays, operation, con-
struction and characteristics, Generator Protection, Transformer
Protection, Feeder and Bus-Bar Protection, Neutral Ground-
ing, Protection against over voltages.
EEE F477 Modeling of Field-Effect NanoDevices 3 0 3
Physical principles and MOS transistor phenomena, developing
I-55
models including effective mobility, temperatures effects, and
source/drain resistances. small-dimensional effects, impact ioni-
zation, velocity saturation drain-induced barrier lowering (DIBL),
ballistic operation, polysilicon depletion, quantum effects, gate-
tunneling currents, gate-induced drain leakage (GIDL) , funda-
mentals of low-power (low-voltage) CMOS design issues; the
threshold voltage shift (due to SCE) , increased leakage power,
sources of power , SOI MOS, (PDSOI, FDSOI) , multigate (MG)
MOSFET, electrostatic integrity and short channel control, quan-
tum mechanical origin, basics of BSIM CMG, compact models
for multigate MOSFETs , mobility in multiple gate devices, im-
provement of the mobility ,crystallographic orientations, strained
Si channels.
EEE F478 Power Systems Laboratory 0 2 2
Experiments on relays, circuit breakers, transmission lines,
switch gear and protection , energy generation methods, and
application of artificial intelligence techniques, electric energy uti-
lization including illumination, electrical drives etc.
EEE F491 Special Projects 3
This is an unstructured open-ended course where under the
overall supervision of an instructor-in-charge, batches of stu-
dents will be attached to different instructors. Each batch will
work on a specific time-bound project which is of basic or pe-
ripheral concern of his discipline. Each student must submit a
project report as a culmination of his endeavour and investiga-
tion. The instructor- in-charge will determine the choice of the
project and also whether or not the project report is to be submit-
ted jointly by a group or individually by a student. The course will
aim to evaluate student's actual ability to use the fundamentals
of knowledge and to meet new unknown situations as demon-
strated by the students' interaction with the instructors and in-
structor-in- charge and aggregated in the project report. The in-
structor-in- charge may assign specific hours for formal brain-
storming sessions.
EEE G510 RF Microelectronics 5
Introduction; application of RF electronics in modern systems;
basic concepts in RF circuit design, active RF components: vari-
ous RF diodes and transistors and their circuit models, matching
and biasing networks, RF amplifier design: low power, low noise
and broadband amplifiers, RF oscillator design; negative re-
sistance oscillator; dielectric resonator oscillators, phase noise.
RF Mixers: Balanced mixers; low noise mixers; noise in RF cir-
cuits, microwave transmitters and receivers.
EEE G511 Integrated Electronics 3 2 5
Review of basic semiconductor devices and ICs, fabrication and
design of integrated circuits, comparison of current bipolar and
MOS technologies, VLSI design methodology and layout exam-
ples, etc. The main objective of this course is to enable the stu-
dents to keep pace with the rapidly changing semiconductor
technology.
EEE G512 Embedded System Design 3 1 4
Introduction to embedded systems; embedded architectures: Ar-
chitectures and programming of microcontrollers and DSPs.
Embedded applications and technologies; power issues in sys-
tem design; introduction to software and hardware co-design.
EEE G513 Machine Learning for Electronics Engi- 4*
neers
Machine Learning approaches - supervised, unsupervised, semi-
supervised, and reinforcement learning. Multi-Layer Perceptron,
Convolutional Neural Networks, Recurrent Neural Networks,
Generative Deep learning, Deep learning techniques and their
application to various types of electronic systems/subsystems
such as control-dominated systems, NLP systems, vision-based
systems, communication systems, embedded systems and IoT
systems. Multi-modal and Multi-task learning, Transfer learning,
challenges in the implementation of ML techniques, complexity
analysis of the ML architectures for hardware implementation,
efficient architectures/ topologies for ML implementation, Hard-
ware Platforms, Tools, and Software Packages for ML.
EEE G514 Nanoelectronic Memories and Technology 3 2 5
Introduction to memory devices in SRAM, DRAM and 3DNAND
Flash, circuit and device considerations, device fabrication tech-
VI
niques and scaling avenues, memory array addressing, readout
circuits, device characterization, reliability characterization. Non-
volatile memory cell structures like (1T-1C 6T, 4T, 1T-1R, 0T-
1R, 1S-1R, floating gate FLASH, SONOS, NROM), and memory
organization (open bit-line, folded bit-line, NAND, NOR, cross-
point etc.), new memory devices and concepts including (e.g.
magnetic tunnel junction memory (MRAM, SST-RAM), ferroelec-
tric memory (FRAM), phase change memory (PCM), metal oxide
resistive switching memory (RRAM), nanoconductive bridge
memory (CBRAM)
Pre-requisites:
EEE F214: Electronic Devices OR EEE F313: Analog and Digital
VLSI design OR MEL G621: VLSI Design OR MEL G631: Phys-
ics and Modelling of Microelectronic Devices
EEE G520 Wireless and Mobile Communication 3 2 5
Signal propagation in a mobile environment, modulation, coding,
equalization; first generation generation systems; multiple ac-
cess techniques like FDMA, TDMA, CDMA, spread spectrum
systems; second & third generation systems, UMTS, IMT-2000;
Wireless LAN, Wireless ATM and Mobile IP; emerging trends in
Wireless & Mobile Communication.
EEE G521 Optoelectronic Devices, Circuits &Systems 3 2 5
Physics of optical radiation and principles of calculation in radia-
tion physics & optics, fundamental laws of photometry. Interac-
tion between optical radiation and matter. Radiation sources. Pa-
rameters of IR detectors and junction photodetectors, parame-
ters common to emitters and receiver, radiation measurements,
optoelectronic components, optoelectronic integrated devices,
photodetector circuits, methods of modulation and optoelectronic
system design and applications.
EEE G522 Advanced Satellite Communication 5*
Radio wave propagation effects, low, medium and geo-
synchronous earth orbits and their main characteristics. Various
sub-systems of the satellite , the outer space and its impact on
the design of spacecraft subsystems, LEO satellite network and
its routing calls; Battery technology , propagation loss models,
modulation and error correction techniques, Digital Video Appli-
cations, Satellite Mobile including NGEO, satellite access tech-
niques, third generation satellite communication, remote sens-
ing, bandwidth utilization and throughput capability, the Indian
National Satellite System (INSAT), INTELSAT and other interna-
tional satellite programs, VSAT, Mobile and Personal Satellite
communication, principles of Global Positioning System (GPS),
GPS receivers and its applications, regulatory and interference
issues. Study and design of uplink transmitter, down link receiv-
er, spacecraft transponder, satellite communication links.
EEE G531 Testable Design and Fault Tolerant Compu-3 2 5
ting
Fault: types, modelling and simulation; testing methodologies,
coverage, economics and quality; test vector generation: design
for testability, built-in self tests; fault tolerant computing; fault tol-
erant software.
EEE G541 Distribution Apparatus and Configurations 3 2 5
Basic configuration of a distribution set-up at the consumer end.
Transformer types, specifications, performance, protection, and
sizing. Types of cables and insulation, cable parameters,
ampacity and protection. Ratings of LV switchgear and their use
in selection, switching transients and clearing time. Properties of
fuses with reference to ampacity. Meters, instrument
transformers, and their application. Voltage control at distribution
levels. Elementary concepts of power quality: power factor,
frequency, and harmonic content.
EEE G542 Power Electronic Converters 3 2 5
The importance of the converter as an interface between source
and load. DC-DC converters: Buck, boost, and buck-boost
configurations. AC-DC converters: Diode and thyristor
converters in single and three phase. Inversion in thyristorised
converters and applications of line commutated inverters. DC-
AC converters: Switch mode voltage source inverters in single
and three phase, PWM operation of different types, VSI’s
operating in multi-levels, space vector modulation techniques.
AC-AC converters: Thyristor fed AC loads, the cycloconverter.
Matrix converter arrays and their operation as DC-DC and DC-
I-56
AC converters.
EEE G543 Power Device Microelectronics and Selec- 3 0 3
tion
Thermal features of power device packaging, the issues of
R and R , heat flow and effect on device temperature, heat
θJC θCS
sink design and selection. The two-layer junction behaviour, the
concept of drift region, characterisation of power diodes. The
base operation in a thick film BJT, steady state characteristics,
turn ON and turn OFF times, the multistage power Darlington.
The four-layer junction behaviour, two transistor model of a
thyristor, dynamic model for a four layer junction device. GTO
thyristors, the turn OFF mechanism in four layer junction
devices, current technological problems. MOS operation and
characteristics, characterisation and structure of the power
MOSFET. Development of the MOSFET to IGBT, technological
advantages, characterisation, and dynamic behaviour. Current
technological problems in insulated gate technologies.
Introduction to matrix converters.
EEE G544 Steady State and Dynamics of Electric Mo-3 2 5
tors
Direct current machines, dynamic characteristics of PM and
shunt DC motors. The Reference Frame theory, balanced
steady state phasor relations and voltage equations.
Symmetrical induction machines: commonly used reference
frames and per-unit system, analysis of steady state and
dynamic operation and free acceleration characteristics from
different reference frames. Synchronous machines: equations in
different reference frames, per-unit system, steady state
analysis, dynamic analysis for load changes and faults.
Brushless DC machines: voltage and torque equations in
machine variables, and rotor reference frame variables, analysis
of steady state and dynamic performance. Operational
impedances and time constants for synchronous machines.
Linearised machine equations, and reduced order machine
equations. Symmetrical and asymmetrical two-phase induction
machines: conversion to stationary reference frame, analysis of
steady state operation of the asymmetrical machine, single
phase induction machine.
EEE G545 Control and Instrumentation for Power 3 0 3
Electronic Systems
The regulation and control problem with reference to power
electronic converters. Converter models for feedback: basic
converter dynamics, fast switching, piece-wise linear models,
discrete-time models. Voltage mode and current mode controls
for DC-DC converters, comparator based control for rectifier
systems, proportional and proportional-integral control
applications. Control design based on linearisation: transfer
functions, compensation and filtering, compensated feedback
control systems. Hysteresis control basics, and application to
DC-DC converters and inverters. General boundary control:
behaviour near a boundary, and choice of suitable boundaries.
Basic ideas of fuzzy control techniques, and performance
issues. Sensors for power electronic circuits, speed and torque
transducers.
EEE G546 Systems Simulation Lab. 4
Simulation tutorial problems on single- and three-phase AC-DC
converters, DC-DC buck-, boost-, and buck-boost converters,
DC-AC inverters in single and three phase with different levels of
control complexity. Simulation of practical applications from
utility and drives. May also include a small project.
EEE G547 Device Drivers 3 2 5
Introduction to operating system, Introduction to Linux Basics,
commands, file system , kernel and introduction to Android, Pro-
cess Synchronization ,Semaphores, Message Passing, Mailbox-
es and debugging, Module programming/ Shell programming /
Character Device Driver, Timing and Interrupts--, Device Driver
Programming as applicable to Linux/ Android/ Windows, Parallel/
Serial Port Driver/ Block /USB /NETWORK/ PCI/ Drivers, tty
Subsystem
EEE G552 Solid State Drives 3 2 5
Introduction to the drive system: requirements, components and
benchmarks; Review of motor theory; Power electronic control of
motors: requirements and operational issues; Static speed con-
VI
trol of induction motors: the AC power controller, slip energy re-
covery, VSI and CSI controlled induction motors; Speed control
of synchronous motors and associated machines; The problem
of DC motor speed control: rectifier and chopper controllers; Ad-
vanced induction motor drive control: vector control, current
modulation, importance of microcontroller based systems; Or-
ganisation of microcontrollers: sensing and actuation of signals,
interrupt handling and timing, priority of tasks in a microcon-
trolled drive system.
EEE G553 Utility Applications of Power Electronics 3 0 3
Static excitation systems: converters as used in SES, control
and the IEEE types, enhancement of stability. HVDC
transmission: configurations of line-commutated converters,
constant current and constant extinction angle control at device
terminal level, individual phase and equidistant pulse firing
control at device level, active and reactive power considerations.
FACTS: impedance type and inverter type FACTS devices, the
static var compensator, the thyristor controlled series reactor,
the STATCOM and its developments in the form of UPFC and
SSSC. Active filters: the power quality problems at distribution
level, inverter control by transient p-q theory, configuration of
active filters and their control, existing bottlenecks.
EEE G554 Soft Switching Converter Technologies 3 0 3
Series, parallel, series-parallel resonant DC-DC converters, half
and full bridge topologies, analysis and design. Sinusoidal anal-
ysis of resonant converters, soft switching, load resonant proper-
ties, exact characteristics. Soft switching mechanisms of semi-
conductor devices, zero current and zero voltage switching quasi
resonant converters, resonant switch topologies, soft switching
in PWM converters and inverters, multi resonant converters,
control of resonant and soft switching converters, EMI suppres-
sion, snubbers, load resonant converters, passive components
at high frequencies.
EEE G555 Transformer and Motor Design 3 0 3
Course description for the above course is to be developed.
EEE G556 DSP Based Control of Electric Drives 3 0 3
State space and transfer matrix representations, representation
of nonlinear systems by update of parameters, output feedback
and state feedback control, basic notion of state estimation.
Sampling of signals, discrete representation of signals, z-
transforms. Nature of discrete time poles and zeros. A/D and
D/A converters as system elements. FIR and IIR behaviour,
noise and its nature. AR, MA, and ARMA models of systems.
The Fourier transform and what it conveys. Processing require-
ments of a DSP, floating point DSP’s: the TMS320C3x family.
Memory organisation, interrupt systems, and I/O interface with
the TMS320C3x family. The TMS320C31 as an embedded con-
troller, drive control features. Applica tions in vector and direct
torque control of synchronous motors, vector and direct torque
control of induction motors, torque control of SRM’s.
EEE G557 Drives for Electronic Transaction 3 0 3
Course description is to be developed.
EEE G558 DSP Based Implementation Drivers 3 0 3
Course description is to be developed.
EEE G559 Advanced Power Electronics 5
Qualitative, Quantitative, and Simulation studies of Power elec-
tronic circuits like AC to DC, DC to DC, DC to AC and AC to AC
converter circuits for their theory, performance, design, testing
and applications. Use of these circuits for industrial, motor con-
trol, FACTS, HVDC, PF improvement and energy conservation
applications.
EEE G581 RF & Microwave Engineering 3 2 5
Introduction to radio frequency engineering; advantages; various
frequency bands; propagation; transmission lines; microwave
waveguides and components; their characterizations; s-
parameters and their use; microwave transistor; FETs, Gunn di-
ode, IMPATT diodes; microwave tubes; Klystron; two cavity
Klystron amplifier analysis; reflex Klystron; TWTs; high power
tubes; cross field tubes; microstriplines; MMICs; microwave
measurements; microwave antennas and microwave communi-
I-57
cation system; microwave applications; ISM applications; intro-
duction to EMI and EMC; microwave hazards.
EEE G582 Telecom Network Management 5
Network architecture and protocols; LAN, MAN and WANs; in-
ternetworking; network planning; network management concepts
and standards; administrative, operational and fault manage-
ment; security issues; remote network management.
EEE G591 Optical Communication 3 2 5
Optical communication systems and components; optical
sources and transmitters (basic concept, design and applica-
tions); modulators (electro-optic, acousto-optic and laser modu-
lation techniques); beam forming; focussing and coupling
schemes to optical repeators; optical amlifiers; optical field re-
ception; coherent and non-coherent lightwave systems; fibre op-
tic communication system design and performance; multichannel
lightwave systems; long haul communications; fibre optic net-
works.
EEE G592 Mobile & Personal Communication 3 2 5
History of mobile radio; the mobile radio signal environment; re-
view of statistical techniques; pathover flat as well as hilly ter-
rain; effects of RF system design on propagation; received sig-
nal envelope and phase characteristics; modulation schemes
employed; functional design of mobile radio systems, diversity
schemes-space; frequency and polarization diversity; mobile ra-
dio system functional design; signal error analysis versus per-
formance criteria; multiple access schemes; classification of the
concepts of sensitive topics; new concepts data transmission via
cellular; spectrum and technology of WLL.
EEE G593 Power Quality 5
Power Quality Introduction and terms and definitions, Voltage
sags and interruptions, Transient Over Voltages, Fundamentals
of harmonics, Harmonic Solutions, Long duration voltage varia-
tions, Distributed generation and power quality, Wiring and
grounding, Power quality monitoring.
EEE G594 Advanced VLSI Devices 5
Device physics of and engineering of advanced transistors, re-
view of metal oxide semiconductor (MOS) with quasi-ballistic
and ballistic transport, Short-channel effects (SCEs) in nanome-
ter regime, scaled MOSFETs, Device physics and engineering of
sub-100nm MOSFETs , Limits of the state-of-the-art silicon de-
vice technology, issues in the miniaturization, Alternative device
structures ,non-conventional MOSFETs, and transport in novel
nanodevices. Analytical expression (supported by TCAD simula-
tion) for the one-dimensional transport and interpretation of nov-
el device characteristics.
EEE G595 Nanoelectronics and Nanophotonics Tech- 5
nology
Semiconductor Fundamentals, Band Theory, Quantum Struc-
tures and Quantum Mechanics, Transport in Quantum Struc-
tures, Optical Properties of Semiconductor Quantum Structures,
Strain Engineering, Electro- Optic Effects, Photonic / electronic
Devices based on Nano structures.
EEE G611 Computer Aided Analysis and Design 3 2 5
The course aims at developing complete self reliance in solving
analysis & design problems of engineering with the aid of com-
puters. It stresses upon the use of more powerful tools including
system planning, simulation and modelling. The student will take
up a design project and will work independently on the project
guided by the instructor or resource person as and when re-
quired. The effort must culminate with a CAAD program and a
project report.
EEE G612 Coding Theory & Practice 3 2 5
Codes for data-compression: instantaneous codes; Kraft ine-
quality; Mcmillan theorem; Huffman codes; codes for error-
detection and correction; binary symmetric channel; channel ca-
pacity, Shannon’s fundamental theorem; linear codes;
Macwilliam’s identity; Reed-muller codes; cyclic codes; BCH
codes; codes for secrecy and security; private-key cryptosys-
tems; affine codes; twisted codes; one-time-pads; public-key
cryptosystems based on large primes and discrete logarithms.
EEE G613 Advanced Digital Signal Processing 5
VI
Review of stochastic processes, models and model classifica-
tion, the identification problem, some field of applications, classi-
cal methods of identification of impulse response and transfer
function models, model learning techniques, linear least square
estimator, minimum variance algorithm, stochastic approxima-
tion method and maximum likelihood method, simultaneous
state and parameter estimation of extended kalman-filter, non-
linear identification, quasi linearization, numerical identification
methods.
EEE G614 Advanced Wireless Communications 3 2 5
Evolution of wireless cellular technologies to 5G and beyond, re-
view of matrix and signal theory for communication applications,
introduction to stochastic geometry for performance analysis of
wireless networks, D2D communications- modeling and analy-
sis, cooperative communications-buffer-aided relaying and per-
formance analysis, modulation and multiple access techniques-
NOMA, OTFS, OAM. Introduction to potential technologies for
beyond 5G/6G communications: IRS, molecular communica-
tions, and AI in wireless communications.
Pre-requisite:
EEE F311: Communication systems
EEE G621 Advanced Electronic Circuits 3 2 5
Linear and non-linear operational circuitry, controlled sources,
Active filters, power amplifiers, Power supplies, Analog switches
and comparators, combinational and sequential logic circuitry.
Data transmission and display, Electronic Controllers, Transduc-
er interfacing and measurement circuits, etc.
EEE G622 Advanced Digital Communication 3 2 5
Introduction to Digital communication, review of probability and
statistic processes; review of source coding and characterization
of signals; optimum receivers for additive white gaussian noise
channel; carrier & symbol synchronization; channel capacity &
coding; block & convolutional codes; communication through
band – limited linear filter channels; adaptive equalization multi-
carrier systems; digital communication through fading multipath
channel; future trends in digital communication.
EEE G625 Safety Critical Embedded Systems Design 4
Course description is same as given under HTSL ZG631.
EEE G626 Hardware Software Co-Design 4
Course description is same as given under HTSL ZG641.
EEE G627 Network Embedded Applications 3 1 4
This course deals with the three main application areas of Net-
work Embedded Systems – Wireless Sensor Networks, Automo-
tive Networks, and Industrial Networks– Network Architecture ,
Deployment Issues, Network Protocol stack: Modular and Cross
Layer Design. Network Node: Architectures, Operating System
and Applications. Middleware Issues and Design. Security and
Encryption
EEE G641Applied Estimation Theory 3 2 5
Review of random processes, linear algebra and matrix theory,
ML phase and timing estimation in digital communication, Scalar
estimation, estimation in real and complex vector space, Study
of performance degradation due to estimation errors, Frequency
diversity and equalization, Study of MLSE for equalization, Esti-
mation of Single Input-Single Output (SISO) channel to very
complex Multi Input-Multi Output (MIMO) channels, study of dif-
ferent estimators such as MMSE, linear MMSE, orthogonal fre-
quency division multiplexing (OFDM) basics, OFDM channel es-
timation, Channel quality estimation, Impact of channel estima-
tion errors on performance, Introduction to WLAN standards,
IEEE 802.11n, channel estimation, MATLAB experiments and
projects.
English
ENGL G511 Growth of the English Language 5
The Origin and development; old English, middle English and
modern English; foreign influences; changes in grammar and
phonology; rise of standard English; English in the international
context.
I-58
ENGL G512 Language and S & T 5
Historical development of communication in science; communi-
cative process in science and technology; language of science &
technology; scientific literature; growth and role of scientific jour-
nals.
ENGL G513 Social Impact of S&T 5
Elements of scientific thinking; role of science and technology in
social change; impact of science on environment; technology
and social growth; impact of science & technology in terms of
developments in transportation and communication and innova-
tions in sources of energy; impact on the quality of life.
ENGL G521 Principles of Language Teaching 5
Teaching different language skills; grading; sequencing and
presentation; teaching at different levels; remedial teaching;
techniques of teaching comprehension, grammar, composition;
lesson planning; syllabus design; testing.
ENGL G522 Aesthetics and Technology 5
Aspects of aestheticism; emergence of aestheticism; influence of
aesthetics on technology; impact of technological explosion on
human sensibility and its expression in selected art forms.
ENGL G531 Applied Linguistics 5
Linguistics and language teaching; contrastive linguistics and its
applications; error analysis; a linguistic theory of translation; lin-
guistic approach to literature.
ENGL G541 Interpretation of Literature 5
Literary forms and conventions and their development; different
critical approaches; practical criticism.
ENGL G551 Information Technology Lab I 5
(This course is specially designed to prepare the stream of input,
viz. traditional English graduates, in the use of technology in
communication).
This course is built around the theme of use of modern technol-
ogy for the purpose of presentation and processing of infor-
mation for effective communication within an organisation. Con-
sistent with this theme, assignments would be drawn from the
student's work environment and from one or more areas of the
following: Computerized text processing; use of utility software
packages for information processing and production; desk top
graphics; desk top video; computerized graphics packages; of-
fice automation equipment such as electric typewriters; photog-
raphy; equipment for projection and preparation of projection
material; reprography equipment; duplication equipment; audio
visual technology involving equipment such as video systems,
audio systems and audio-visual recording equipment; tech-
niques for display and exhibition of formatted information, etc.
The course will be unstructured in nature and assignments may
require study of the principles of the above areas, or the actual
use of equipment and techniques.
ENGL G561 Information Technology Lab II 5
(This course is specially designed to prepare the stream of input,
viz. traditional English graduates in the use of technology in
communication)
This is a sequal to the first course of the same name. The theme
of use of modern technology for the purpose of presentation and
processing of information for effective communication within an
organization would be further developed. However, assignments
would invariably emphasize the integration between various
technologies for totality of communication.
ENGL G571 Applied Communication I 5
(This course is specially designed to prepare the stream of input,
viz. engineering and hard science graduates in communication
methods)
Process of communication; elements of speech; role of body
language; dyadic communication; participation in different types
of discussion groups, audio-visual aids.
ENGL G581 Applied Communication II 5
(This course is specially designed to prepare the stream of input
viz. engineering and hard science graduates, in communication
methods)
Elements of effective writing; methods of written exposition; art
of condensation; writing technical articles, research papers, pro-
posals, reports, manuals and letters, preparation and use of
graphic aids; mechanics of writing; technical editing.
VI
ENGL G591 Project Formulation and Preparation 5
This course is designed to inculcate principles of technical doc-
umentation as required within S&T organizations. Through this
course, students are expected to acquire familiarity with several
of the following: Proposals, feasibility reports, formal project re-
ports, short reports, memos, negotiations, contracts, etc. In the
process principles of project formulation and evaluation, such as
technical considerations; performance specifications; preliminary
block diagrams, types and analysis of contracts; cost estimation
concepts, work breakdown structure; project data preparation,
scheduling facilities etc., would be introduced. The course would
invariably include the preparation of a detailed report embodying
as many of the above concepts as appropriate.
ENGL G611 Twentieth Century English Literature 5
Margret Atwood, Tony Morrison, Samuel Beckett, Harold Pinter,
Philip Larkin,Ted Hughes.
Finance
FIN F212 Fundamentals of Finance and Accounts 3 0 3
This course is a broad introduction to finance and related areas.
An introduction to basic accounting principles for measuring and
communicating financial data about a business enterprise to ex-
ternal parties, single and double entry, ledgers, journal, trading,
profit and loss and appropriation accounts, trial balance and bal-
ance sheet; cash flow statements; capital budgeting and risk
management using risk return trade-off notions; introduction to
working capital management; structure of capital market; primary
and secondary markets; financial market reforms, source of in-
vestment information; portfolio selection.
FIN F213 Mathematical and Statistical Methods 3 0 3
Methods of collection and presentation of statistical data; calcu-
lation and interpretation of various measures like standard devia-
tion, variance, Kurtosis, correlation coefficient; Sampling Meth-
ods - Simple random sampling, with and without replacement,
stratified random sampling. Statistic and sample moments,
Sampling Distributions - Properties of Student’s – t, Chi-square
and F-distributions. Theory of Estimation - Point estimation,
method of moments; maximum likelihood; interval estimation.
Testing of Hypothesis - Statistical hypothesis, simple and com-
posite hypothesis,critical region, types and size of error, test of
simple hypothesis versus simple alternative. Analysis of Vari-
ance - Analysis of one-way classified data, application in the
study of relationships. Theory of Index Numbers - Calculation of
Laspeyre’s, Paasche’s, Fisher’s and Chain index numbers, crite-
ria of a good index number, cost of living index numbers, base
shifting, splicing and deflating of index numbers. Introduction to
Regression Analysis - Specification of simple linear regression
model, least square method of estimation, classical assump-
tions, general and confidence approach to hypothesis testing.
FIN F214 Economic Environment of Business 3 0 3
Business and Economics, Government and business; market an
the role of the Government, market failure, Government and the
market, government and the firm, Fiscal policy and the environ-
ment, Macroeconomic environment; macroeconomic environ-
ment of business, Business activity, employment and inflation,
monetary policy and economic environment, balance of payment
accounting, Business in the international environment; World
trade and international monetary system; international investing;
investment decisions in multinational markets; country risk; mul-
tinational corporate strategy; multinational treasury manage-
ment; currency risk; globalization and multinational business,
FDI, FII, pricing strategy and business.
FIN F242 Introduction to Financial Mathematics 3 0 3
Basic financial calculations; financial securities, time value of
money, Annuties and equation of values; discounting and accu-
mulations, flat rate and APRs, Capital Budgeting Techniques
and compound interest problems; NPV, IRR, payback period.
Arbitrage, Forward contracts, and term structure of interest; ra-
tionale of arbitrage assumptions; forward contracts, calculating
the forward price, hedging, fixed cash income, spot rate and for-
ward rate, term structure of interest rate, yield curves, yield to
maturity, interest rate risk calculation, Stochastic interest models
and investments; simple stochastic interest rate models, fixed
and varying interest model, log normal distribution, fixed interest
I-59
government borrowings, government bonds, tax, government
bills, convertibles, property, derivatives, future, clearing house,
margin, bond futures, short interest futures, stock index futures
etc.
FIN F243 Functions and Working of Stock Exchanges 3 0 3
Overview of financial markets and instruments; stock exchanges
in India; trading and settlement procedures; listing; risk man-
agement; primary markets; debt markets; indices; mutual funds;
derivatives; exchange traded funds; corporate governance; SEBI
and regulation of the markets; important events in the stock
markets; market microstructure; empirical studies on the Indian
markets.
FIN F244 Indian Financial System 3 0 3
Indian Financial System, financial markets, financial intermediar-
ies and financial instruments. Components and structure of the
financial system. Financial Assets & Financial Markets: Meaning
of financial assets & types, role and structure of money market
and capital market – Call money market, Treasury bill market,
Commercial bill market including commercial paper and certifi-
cate of deposits, Discount market – Government securities mar-
ket – Debt Market – Industrial Securities Market. Markets for de-
rivatives; futures and options, and other derivatives. Definition
and types of non-bank financial institutions, LIC, UTI, Mutual
Funds, Venture Capital, bankassurance; their growth and impact
on India's economic development. Organisational set up & func-
tions of regulators: Reserve bank of India, SEBI, IRDA, Financial
sector reforms.
FIN F266 Study Project 3
These courses include projects which are oriented towards read-
ings from published literature or books about new frontiers of
development or analysis of available database. These courses
are normally available to students in second or higher levels.
These courses must coterminate with project reports.
FIN F311 Derivatives & Risk Management 3 0 3
Overview of Financial Markets. Introduction to derivatives. Defi-
nition of future, forward, option and swap. Difference between
various players of derivative market, their motives and types of
position they can hold. Mechanics of future, option & swap mar-
kets. Hedging strategies. Option Pricing and understanding of
various factors affecting option price. Calculations of Greeks. In-
troduction to interest rates, yield, term structure and forward
rates. Mechanics of Bond Market. Review of concept of com-
pounding and time value of money. Difference between floating
rate and fixed income bonds. Price quotes and accrued interest.
Pricing of Bonds. Computation of yield. Bond Price volatility. Du-
ration, Modified Duration and convexity. Factors affecting Bond
Yields and the Term Structure. Concept of Risk. Perspective of
Risk from view point of individuals, companies & financial institu-
tions. Commercial Banks and risks faced by them. Different
types of Insurance and risk faced insurance companies. Intro-
duction to various risks: Market Risk, Credit Risk, Operational
Risk, Liquidity risk & Model Risk. Concept of Value at Risk
FIN F312 Fundamental of Taxation & Audit 3 0 3
Legal business entities and tax assessments; profit and gains of
business or profession; capital gains; Tax planning for business
entities; tax accounting principles; VAT , excise duty, custom du-
ty etc.; computation of tax liability; appeal procedure; auditing
procedure and taxation principles; auditing concepts; generally
accepted auditing standards; audit documentation and evidence;
role of internal N-131 control and concurrent audit; audit mecha-
nism, valuation of assets, and auditing of depreciation, provi-
sions, reserves, profits and dividends, etc.
FIN F313 Security Analysis and PortfolioManagement 3 0 3
Introduction to investment and securities; profile of financial as-
sets; new issue market or primary market, initial public offerings
(IPO); secondary market; framework of risk & return; fundamen-
tal analysis- economy, industry; company analysis; stock evalua-
tion models; multiple holding period and multiple growth rate;
bond analysis and bond management strategies; technical anal-
ysis; efficient market theory; portfolio management; Markowitz
model; Sharpe’s Single Index model; capital asset pricing model;
financial derivatives-options & futures.
FIN F314 Investment Banking and Financial Services 3 0 3
VI
Merchant banking function- perspectives; organization of mer-
chant banking function; managing new issues; negotiating terms
with financial institutions, brokers, investors and under writers;
pricing of further issues- SEBI guidelines; syndication of loans
from banks; preparation of loan dossiers and application for fi-
nancial assistance; negotiations; public deposits to finance work-
ing capital; agencies mobilizing public deposits; regulations gov-
erning raising of public deposits; cost of public deposits, factor-
ing, forfeiting , structured finance, securitization and personal fi-
nance like house loan, personal loan and other individual loans,
non-fund based services -credit rating, business advisory ser-
vices, mergers, de-mergers and acquisition, asset management
and insurance commodities services and wealth management.
FIN F315 Financial Management 3 0 3
Concepts and techniques of financial management decision;
concepts in valuation - time value of money; valuation of a firm's
stock, capital asset pricing model; investment in assets and re-
quired returns; risk analysis; financing and dividend policies,
capital structure decision; working capital management, man-
agement of cash, management of accounts receivable; inventory
management, short and intermediate term financing, long term
financial tools of financial analysis, financial ratio analysis, funds
analysis and financial forecasting, operating and financial lever-
ages.
FIN F341 International Financial Markets and Services 3 0 3
Currency futures, options and swaps; interest rate determination
and asset pricing in face of volatile nominal and real exchange
rates; international portfolio management; treasury risk man-
agement and performance measurement; major international
stock exchanges: New York; ISE London; Tokyo; trading and
settlement practices; listing of Indian derivatives on Brussles
stock exchange; arranging foreign collaboration; floating India
funds; syndication of Euro-dollar loans.
FIN F342 Project Finance 3 0 3
Project identification, feasibility; appraisal of projects from tech-
nical, financial and economic view points; design of capital struc-
ture; factors influencing form of capital; instruments; shares,
preference shares, debentures, convertible debentures; borrow-
ing from development finance institutions.
FIN F366 Lab Project 3
FIN F367 Lab Project 3
These courses include projects involving laboratory investigation
or laboratory development in the students discipline or interdis-
ciplinary areas. These courses are normally available to stu-
dents in third or higher levels. These courses must coterminate
with project reports.
FIN F414 Financial Risk Analytics and Management 3 0 3
Financial risk (which includes interest rate risk, credit risk, for-
eign exchange risk and portfolio risk), Application of Asset price
Theory, CAPM and Modern Portfolio Theory, Multifactor models
of risk and return, Capital adequacy, BASEL Norms; Compre-
hensive Capital Analysis and Review, Basel Committee on
Banking Supervision guidelines, Value at Risk (VaR), VaR from
regulator perspective, Responsive VaR Model, Addressing VaR
weakness, Backtesting Concepts - Checking the Strength of
VaR Model, Issues with the Standard VaR models, Risk Not in
VaR (RNIV) to VaR migration of risk, Volatility Clustering, Quan-
tifying and Modeling volatilities, Hedging techniques, Options
Greeks, Managing Risk with Deriatives.
FIN F491 Special Project 3
This is an unstructured open-ended course where under the
overall supervision of an instructor-in-charge, batches of stu-
dents will be attached to different instructors. Each batch will
work on a specific time-bound project which is of basic or pe-
ripheral concern of his discipline. Each student must submit a
project report as a culmination of his endeavour and investiga-
tion. The instructor- in-charge will determine the choice of the
project and also whether or not the project report is to be submit-
ted jointly by a group or individually by a student. The course will
aim to evaluate student's actual ability to use the fundamentals
of knowledge and to meet new unknown situations as demon-
strated by the students' interaction with the instructors and in-
structor-in- charge and aggregated in the project report. The in-
I-60
structor-in- charge may assign specific hours for formal brain-
storming sessions.
French
FRE N101T Beginning French 3
Basic grammar; vocabulary; reading practice; translation
of simple passages.
Not available for meeting the requirements of any pro-
gramme except as prerequisite for another French course.
Can be taken only on audit.
FRE N102T Technical French 3 0 3
Prerequisite : FRE N101T
Phrases and sentence patterns in technical literature;
special technical vocabulary; reading and translation of
current technical literature from French to English with the
help of a dictionary.
This course is designed to meet the foreign language re-
quirement of the Ph.D. Programme and is not available for
meeting the requirement of any other programme. Can be
taken only on audit.
German
GER N101T Beginning German 3 0 3
Basic grammar; vocabulary; reading practice; translation
of simple passages.
Not available for meeting the requirements of any pro-
gramme except as prerequisite for another German
course. Can be taken only on audit.
GER N102T Technical German 3 0 3
Prerequisite : GER N101T
Phrases and sentence patterns in technical literature;
special technical vocabulary; reading and translation of
current technical literature from German to English with
the help of a dictionary.
This course is designed to meet the foreign language re-
quirements of the Ph.D. programme and is not available
for meeting the requirements of any other programme.
Can be taken only on audit.
General Studies
GS F211 Modern Political Concepts 3 0 3
Nature and scope of political science; emergence and basis of
the state; rights and duties; forms of government; democracy,
fascism, capitalism, socialism, anarchism, communism, Maoism,
radicalism and Gandhism.
GS F212 Environment, Development & Climate 3 0 3
Change
Specific topics on environment, development and climate
change; regional, national and international climate debates; re-
view of international climate negotiations such as Kyoto, Copen-
hagen and other declarations; environment problems: causes,
sustainability and policies; population, resources and sustainabil-
ity; population dynamics, capacity and conservation; food securi-
ty, poverty, impact and global solutions; energy resources: re-
newable, wind, oil, natural gas, nuclear energy; growth, technol-
ogy and greenhouse gas emissions, carbon credit; regional im-
pacts of climate change and adaptation strategies; techniques in
modeling; water resources and pollution: monsoon, drought,
rainwater harvesting, traditional practices in water conservation;
case studies.
GS F213 Development Theories 3 0 3
Course description is to be developed.
GS F221 Business Communication 3 0 3
Managerial communication – national and international contexts,
Interpersonal Communication, persuasive communication,
communication technology, effective listening group communica-
tion, professional presentation.
GS F222 Language Lab Practice 0 3 3
Writing: Grammar and usage, sentence completion, jumbled
VI
sentences, emphatic word order, vocabulary building, message
organization, paragraph development techniques and note tak-
ing. Reading: Skimming, scanning, rapid reading, analytical
reading, factual reading, and aesthetic reading. Listening: Con-
tent listening, critical listening, aesthetic listening, empathetic lis-
tening, listening to short conversations, stories, lectures.
GS F223 Introduction to Mass Communication 3 0 3
Mass communication: an overview, history of media and media
plan, cinema, radio, television, theatre, advertising, audience
and media, public relations, writing for media, new information
technology: software revolution, internet, social media, video
conferencing.
GS F224 Print and Audio-Visual Advertising 3 0 3
The Dimensions of Advertising; Advertising and Marketing;
Creative strategy and Creative process; Creative Execution: Art
and copy; Media strategy; Advertising research; Relationship
Building: Public relation and Corporate advertising; Ethical is-
sues.
GS F231 Dynamics of Social Change 3 0 3
Nature of society, social institutions; concept and nature of so-
cio-cultural change, obstacles, rate and direction of change; fac-
tors of social change-ideological, economic, technological and
political demographies; agencies of social change-education,
leadership, propaganda, legislative reforms; five-year plans and
social change, peasant and land reform, bhoodan and gramdan;
changing pattern of family, marriage, caste and religion.
GS F232 Introductory Psychology 3 0 3
The development of psychology as a science -- individual and
the environment; nature; kinds and determinants of perceptions;
response mechanism and kinds of responses, motivations,
modifications of behaviour through learning, memory and trans-
fer of training; thought processes, problem solving and creative
thinking; nature and characteristics of psychological tests; nature
and evaluation techniques of intelligence and personality.
GS F233 Public Policy 3 0 3
Public Policy-meaning nature and types; approaches and mod-
els of public policy; nature of public process-process in the ex-
ecutive; parliamentary processes; processes to manage the rul-
ing party-government interfaces; strategic thinking on the pro-
cess of policymaking, judicial policy making.
GS F234 Development Economics 3 0 3
Concept of development; statistical foundation of decisions; nu-
trition, disease and climate as influences on growth; critical im-
portance of population; importance of agriculture, international
trade and industry; cost- benefit analysis and planning process.
GS F241 Creative Writing 2 1 3
Principles of creative writing; stimulating creative activity; tech-
niques of creating images; constructing events and creating
characters, writing short stories, plays and poems, writing critical
essays on works of art.
The course will require from the student a comprehensive report
on the techniques learnt and include samples of his creative writ-
ings.
GS F242 Cultural Studies 3 0 3
Introduction to Cultural studies, Importance of cultural studies,
types of cultural studies, relation to Critical theory, relation to Lit-
erary Criticism. Introduction to theories such as Communication
studies, Film studies, Feminist theory, Art history/Criticism, Soci-
etal impact, business relevance, introduction to myriad practices,
institutions, beliefs and varied social structures within a given
culture.
GS F243 Current Affairs 3 0 3
Introduction, importance and scope; domains: political, social,
religious, scientific, developmental, etc.; categories: controver-
sial, non controversial, neutral; sources of information: newspa-
pers, magazines, posters, pamphlets, manifestoes, etc.; reading
skills: skimming, scanning, extensive and intensive reading; un-
derstanding, interpreting and analysing news, events and infor-
mation; forming, balancing and expressing opinion.
I-61
GS F244 Reporting and Writing for Media 3 0 3
Reporters and their functions; What makes news; Analysing the
components; Getting the information and putting it together; Or-
ganizing a news story; Building colour into news stories; Fighting
the formula story ; Writing Leads; Message molecules (Vocabu-
lary, grammar, Spelling), Human Interest and Depth Report;
Finding and using news sources; Basics of ethics in Journalism.
GS F245 Effective Public Speaking 2 1 3
Principles of public speaking; importance of effective listening;
use of body language; characteristics of voice; ways to control
stage fright; measures to develop confidence; audience analysis;
modes of delivery; organization of speech; speeches for special
occasion: welcome, introduction, felicitation, farewell, valedicto-
ry, inaugural; impromptu and extemporaneous speeches; meet-
ings, group discussions, professional presentations, interviews.
(This course is extensively practice-oriented. Theoretical guide-
lines also will be given to the students for achieving effective-
ness in public speaking. Students would be asked to prepare
and deliver a number of talks and presentations. Comments and
discussions will follow each presentation so as to provide the
students opportunity to correct themselves. Group discussions
and presentations will be recorded and projected for them to ob-
serve their organization, body language and understand the nu-
ances of the characteristics of their voice. Evaluation compo-
nents will be designed to assess the students’ ability to listen ac-
tively and speak effectively. The new language laboratory will be
used to enable the students to listen to speeches by eminent
leaders and renowned personalities who were/are able to attract
the masses with their powerful speeches. The lab would also be
used to conduct group discussions through computers).
GS F266 Study Project 3
These courses include projects which are oriented towards read-
ings from published literature or books about new frontiers of
development or analysis of available database. These courses
are normally available to students in second or higher levels.
These courses must coterminate with project reports.
GS F311 Introduction to Conflict Management 3 0 3
Characteristics and dynamics of conflict, reasons for conflict; the
value of conflict in social change; the different approaches to
addressing and managing conflict; Examining the history and
impacts of a conflict; exploring stakeholder power and relation-
ship; assessment of options to address conflict; tools for deter-
mining the best strategy; incentive sand methods in getting
stakeholders to collaborate; active listening; skills in mediation
and facilitation; roles of mediator and facilitator in conflict man-
agement; dealing with emotions and difficult situations; planning
and preparing for negotiations; improving negotiation skills; joint
problem solving approaches; building agreements; building con-
flict management mechanisms and consensus-building strate-
gies.
GS F312 Applied Philosophy 3 0 3
Content of Philosophical Perspectives – Ethical, Logical, Epis-
temological and Metaphysical; Ethics and Social Dilemmas; So-
cial Justice and Equality; Freedom of Expression; Social and
Value Dimensions of Technology; Impact of Information Tech-
nology on the Quality of Life; Computer and Inter net Crime;
Democratic Values and the Internet.
GS F313 Marxian Thoughts 3 0 3
Marx and his times; basic tenets; dialectical materialism; eco-
nomic determinism; doctrine of surplus value; doctrine of class
struggle; different schools of Marxism; Leninism; Stalinism; Mao-
ism; future of Marxism.
GS F321 Mass Media Content & Design 3 0 3
Types of Corporate Communication documents; Importance of
corporate communication; communication documents for stake-
holders; Data collection for documents- Sources, types, meth-
ods; Analyzing and Organizing the content – preparing the
drafts; Design Concepts; Design Technologies – Overview; Spe-
cific Design tools – Dreamweaver, Macromedia Director, Adobe
Premier, Photoshop, Flash; Integrating Content and Design.
GS F322 Critical Analysis of Literature and Cinema 3 0 3
VI
Creativity and Aesthetics; An overview of Major Movements in
Literature and Cinema; Interpretation of Selected Works; Cine-
ma & Art; Understanding Drama: Theme, Character, Plot, form;
Understanding Poetry: Diction, Imagery, Symbolism, Structure
and Form, Personification, Apostrophe, Sound and Rhythm; Un-
derstanding fiction: Setting, Point of View, Plot and Character;
Understanding Short Fiction: Meaning and message, Style and
Coherence; Understanding Cinema: Plot; Character; Screen-
play; Linguistic, Social, Musical codes; Cinematic Codes; Cam-
era Work.
GS F325 Journalism 3 0 3
Principles of reporting; the news media and public relations;
ground rules for reporters; investigative reporting; specialised
reporting of events, trends and activities; creating headlines; ed-
iting, copyediting; newspaper style; proof reading; the press and
the law.
GS F326 Creative Thinking 2 1 3
Creative thinking & its importance, Process of creative thinking,
Road blocks to creative thinking, Developing creative thinking,
Brainstorming, Bloom’s Taxanomy, Assessment of creative
thinking, Conceptual framework for Critical thinking, Aspects of
critical thinking, Stages of critical thinking; Reasoning: Fountain
head of critical thinking, Need & benefit of critical thinking, Criti-
cal thinking in decision making, Developing critical thinking in
classroom, Assessment of critical thinking skills.
GS F327 Selected Reading 3 0 3
The course is intended to nurture the students’ critical thinking
and to enhance their skills at information gathering and express-
ing. Selected readings from books in the areas of History, Sci-
ence & Technology, Culture, Literature, Art, Philosophy, Psy-
chology, Religion, Development Concepts and Trends etc. will
be assigned to the students. A set of books will be identified in at
least two broad areas for study and analysis. This course is de-
signed only for students of M.Sc.(Tech.) General Studies Pro-
gramme.
GS F331 Techniques in Social Research 3 0 3
Principles of social research, research process, stages of social
research, choosing the research problem, objectivity and subjec-
tivity in social research, ethics in social research, ethical codes
of practice, confidentiality and anonymity, privacy, Effects of
Value in social research, constructing social explanations, de-
scriptive studies, explanatory studies, designing a social re-
search proposal, quantitative research, survey, sampling, SPSS,
various statistical tests, qualitative research, observation: partic-
ipant and non-participant, issues in conducting qualitative re-
search studies, case studies of socio-economic, political, health,
gender and developmental issues, interview as social interac-
tion, ethnographic research, field study, hypothesis testing, anal-
ysis of data, report preparation and documentation, factors limit-
ing application of social research, evaluation research and de-
velopment of social indicators.
GS F332 Contemporary India 3 0 3
Topics will include some or all of the following: economic pro-
cess; contemporary Indian planning and industry; political pro-
cesses; Contemporary Indian political scene and Indian admin-
istration: India and the contemporary world; social processes:
contemporary Indian educational scene; religion and caste sys-
tem; Indian science; Indian women; cultural processes; contem-
porary Indian art, music, dance, theatre, cinema and literature.
GS F333 Public Administration 3 0 3
Definition, nature and scope of public administration; the chief
executive; leadership qualities of an administrator; principles of
organization; organization of Ministries of Home and Finance;
personnel administration-bureaucracy; recruitment, promotion,
conduct and discipline, employer-employee relations; admin-
istration at work-planning, policy formulation, decision making,
supervision, coordination; integrity in administration; public cor-
porations in India; financial administration in India; local admin-
istration in India.
GS F334 Global Business, Technology and 3 0 3
Knowledge Sharing
Changing corporate landscape, New knowledge industries, net-
I-62
working and interdependence, Technology: a fundamental driv-
ing force, WTO. Global Business Environment, Intellectual Prop-
erty Rights (IPR), FDI, trends in India and comparison with Chi-
na. Technology import and export, Technology transfer and ad-
aptation. Need for technology intermediation, newly emerging
techno-business opportunities, technology forecasting, technol-
ogy assessment, technical actions. The role of small and medi-
um enterprise’s and the changing roles of enterprises. Leader-
ship for the inter-networked business, Employment and Jobs,
access and equity, quality of life, global knowledge innovation in-
frastructure.
GS F342 Computer Mediated Communication 3 0 3
Course description is to be developed.
GS F343 Short Film and Video Production 2 1 3
Introduction; communication media formats like audio, film, vid-
eo, audio recording and editing; image composting; script writing
: screenplay; equipment: video cameras, film cameras, the lens,
the camera; the film stock: negatives, prints, aspect ratio, grain,
gauge, speed, colour contrast, tone; handling the camera; image
technology, sound technology; basic filming techniques: lights
and lighting, shooting, sound recording, sound track, dubbing,
voice over; visual effects, editing: familiarization with editing
software, mixing and looping; final production.
GS F344 Copywriting 2 0 2
Concept of Copywriter, Setting up as a Copywriter, Copywriting
Audience, Copy Writing Process, Marriage of Visual and Copy,
Copy Types-Email Marketing, Direct Mail Press Release, Press
Ads, Writing Leaflets and Brochures, Newsworthy Newsletters,
Radio Copy, Online Copywriting, Other Types of Copy.
GS F345 Constitution of India 3 0 3
Practical, historical and legal importance of the constitution of
India; evolution and features of the Constitution of India; India's
political, social, and economic processes as envisaged in the
Constitution; implications for democracy; institutions, aspirations,
philosophy, and nature of the constitution; democratic logic of
the Indian State; relationship between the individual and the
State.
GS F366 Lab Project 3
GS F367 Lab Project 3
These courses include projects involving laboratory investigation
or laboratory development in the students discipline or interdis-
ciplinary areas. These courses are normally available to stu-
dents in third or higher levels. These courses must coterminate
with project reports.
GS F491 Special Project 3
This is an unstructured open-ended course where under the
overall supervision of an instructor-in-charge, batches of stu-
dents will be attached to different instructors. Each batch will
work on a specific time-bound project which is of basic or pe-
ripheral concern of his discipline. Each student must submit a
project report as a culmination of his endeavour and investiga-
tion. The instructor- in-charge will determine the choice of the
project and also whether or not the project report is to be submit-
ted jointly by a group or individually by a student. The course will
aim to evaluate student's actual ability to use the fundamentals
of knowledge and to meet new unknown situations as demon-
strated by the students' interaction with the instructors and in-
structor-in- charge and aggregated in the project report. The in-
structor-in- charge may assign specific hours for formal brain-
storming sessions.
Humanities and Social Sciences
HSS F211 Introduction to Arabic 3 0 3
Recognition of Arabic alphabets; Understanding and practice of
Arabic grammar; Comprehending paragraphs and reproducing it
in simple Arabic; Reading and interpreting short Arabic stories,
newspaper headlines; Listening and understanding radio and TV
news; Vocabulary building; Using profession specific words and
phrases related to engineering and business; Conversation with
Arabic speaking people in different situations such as introduc-
tion and greetings, interaction with family and friends, communi-
VI
cation during vacation and holidays, communication at the work-
place, restaurant, bank, government offices, asking and answer-
ing questions during job interviews, attending phone calls, etc.
(emphasis will be on Standard Arabic and Emirati dialect).
HSS F221 Readings from Drama 3 0 3
Oliver Goldsmith, John Galsworthy, T.S. Eliot, John Osborne.
HSS F222 Linguistics 3 0 3
Linguistics as a field of study and its relationship with other dis-
ciplines; nature of language; its varieties and role in society;
concepts of structure, system, unit and class; theories of linguis-
tic analysis.
HSS F223 Appreciation of Indian Music 3 0 3
The course is intended as an appreciation of Indian music; the
emphasis will be upon exposing the students to musical perfor-
mances, records, tapes, both vocal and instrumental; through
these illustrations the consciousness in terms of the distinction
between Raag and Taal etc., is expected to be derived; the
course will pick up a certain number of Raags from the basic
thaats and demonstrate the delineation of the Raag through
Alap, through various improvisations based upon compositions;
the appreciation of concepts both vocal and instrumental (Sitar
and Violin) is expected to be obtained; Karnatik music will also
be touched upon particularly in terms of Raags common to Hin-
dustani Music.
HSS F224 English Skills for Academics 3 0 3
Nature and scope of English for specific academic purposes;
Common core academic genres: description, narration, cause-
effect, problem solution, and argumentative; Writing for specific
purposes: paragraphs, essays, critiques, research; Academic
English lexis: AWL and AVL; Lexical cohesion: adverbials, collo-
cations; Publication of word lists for English for specific purpos-
es: corpus-based study (through AntConc tools); Discourse pat-
terns: argument & counter argument, self-referencing, adverbi-
als; Language use: DIY activities for word, phrase, clause and
text level aspects of discipline specific texts
HSS F226 Postmodernism 3 0 3
Postmodernism, The Postmodern Condition, History of Post-
modernism in brief, Pluralism, Eclecticism, Polysemy, Intertextu-
ality, Metanarratives, Language Games, Parody, Pastiche,
Simulation, Postcolonialism, Commodification, Deconstruction-
and New Historicism, Creativity, Critical Judgment, Ethical and
Social Understanding, analysis of postmodern cultural artifacts
and practices from fine art, music, theology, literature, and film
alongside primary texts by the leading theorists of postmodern-
ism.
HSS F227 Cross Cultural Skills 3 0 3
Overview of Intercultural Communication, Intercultural Commu-
nication in the Global Workplace, Technology as cultural Power
and Its Social Impact, Critical Issues and challenges in Intercul-
tural Communication, Understanding interrelatedness among
Religion, Family, Culture, Gender and Race.
HSS F228 Phonetics and Spoken English 3 0 3
Speech mechanism; the English phonemes; word accent; fea-
tures of connected speech; phonetic transcriptions; varieties of
spoken English; spoken English in India; problems of Indian
speakers; oral reading of passages including conversation;
speech training.
HSS F229 Introduction to Western Music 3 0 3
A historical and cultural examination of music in Western culture
from the Middle Ages to the 21st century; Listening to and un-
derstanding different genres of music; Fundamentals of Music:
Rhythm, Meter and Measure; Melody and Harmony; Pitch
names; Intervals; Key signatures; Chord progressions; Score
reading; In-tune singing; Ear training; Making music on the elec-
tronic keyboard.
HSS F232 Introduction to Development Studies 3 0 3
History of development; meanings of development; Key devel-
opment thinkers: Smith, Marx, Liszt, Keynes, Prebisch, Fried-
man; 20th century perspectives on development: dependency,
modernization, human development, post- and anti-development
theories; Models of development: ISI and neoliberalism; Themes
I-63
in comparative international development: environment, health,
gender, foreign aid, social and human rights.
HSS F233 Main Trends in Indian History 3 0 3
A panoramic view of the development of Indian thought and so-
ciety; evaluation of Indian life and quality from earliest times
through the so-called Hindu, Muslim and British periods; the pre-
sent day analysis and discussion on the basic features of Indian
society, its strength and its weakness; a glimpse into future in
terms of the transformation of the Indian society.
HSS F234 Main Currents of Modern History 3 0 3
Renaissance, the major revolutions of the world; rise of national-
ism; growth of imperialism; world between the two world wars;
super powers and the contemporary world; resurgence of Asia,
protest movements in Africa and Latin America; problem of world
peace.
HSS F235 Introductory Philosophy 3 0 3
An overview of some philosophical theories and issues both
from India and the western world; nature and purpose of philos-
ophy; theories of cosmology, metaphysics and epistemology;
skepticism and its philosophical value; contemporary philosophy.
HSS F236 Symbolic Logic 3 0 3
A brief historical survey of the development of logic; nature and
kinds of arguments; sentential connectives; symbolization of
statements and arguments; truth tables, establishing validity of
arguments by truth tables and different types of proofs, quanti-
fied statements; quantified arguments and their validity.
HSS F237 Contemporary Indian English Fiction 3 0 3
Indian novel in English as a global phenomenon; pioneering
publications; new approaches to the art of storytelling and re-
working of language introduced in Indian English fiction. Devel-
opments in contemporary Indian fiction in English from the 2000
to the present; Analysis of selected novels set in their historical,
political, social and cultural contexts, and alternate view-points
on contemporary India.
HSS F238 Sports and Society 3 0 3
The Sociology of Sport; Theories; Sports and Socialization;
Sports and Culture; Deviance and Violence; Class, Gender,
Race and Ethnicity; Sports and Education; Sports and Economy;
Sports and Politics; Sports and Media; Sports and Globalization.
HSS F242 Introduction to Phonology 3 0 3
Means of communication; language differences;human speech
sounds; organization and structure;deployment; historical evolu-
tion; tools and theoreticalframework; formal analysis of data;
theories.
HSS F243 Introduction to Critical Pedagogy 3 0 3
Critical pedagogy; ideology and education; oppressivevs. libera-
tory pedagogy; practice of freedom;democratic education; hid-
den curriculum; power inclassroom; politics in classroom; class;
religion;gender; sexuality; disability; examination and im-
pact;mind as blank slate; awakening critical conscious-
ness;humanistic teaching.
HSS F244 Crime and New Media 3 0 3
Biological Theories: The ‘Born Criminal’, Social Darwinism, De-
tective Fiction and the Forensic Method, Monstrous Bodies;
Psychoanalytic Theories: Trauma and Perversion, Trigger Warn-
ing, Voyeurism, Spectacle of Punishment; Social Disorganization
Theories: Sociopath and Vigilante, Organized Crime, Cyber Bul-
lying and Trolling, Panopticism; Feminist Theories: Female Of-
fender, Female Victim, Law Enforcement, Social Rights Move-
ments.
HSS F245 Gender, Science and Technology 3 0 3
Introduction to science studies: Nature of science and technolo-
gy, Modern Western science, Science study debates in Indian
subcontinent; Gender, science and technology: Sex and gender,
Representation of genders in science and technology, Access
and retention; Feminism and science: Practice of science and
gender, Feminist epistemology; Feminism and technology: Gen-
der-technology debates, case studies.
VI
HSS F246 Philosophy of Nāgārjuna 3 0 3
Abhidharma notions; Rejection of aggregates, elements, and
conditioned entity; Desire and the desirous, agent and action,
and fire and fuel; Ontological independence, prior entity, initial
and final limits, intrinsic nature, and compounded phenomena;
Early-Buddhist views on suffering, bondage and freedom; Action
and consequence; Self and entities within substance metaphys-
ics; Time, origin and dissolution of existents, Tathāgata, assem-
blage, and conjunction; Four noble truths, nirvāṇa, and the
twelve links of dependent origination.
HSS F247 Social Informatics 3 0 3
Intro to Social Informatics; Evolution of Social Informatics-India
and Global; Right to Information and Consent of the Networked;
Critical Informatics; Infrastructure and Equitable Information
Technology; Identity and Community; Hackers and Hacking; Eth-
ics, Law, and Policy related to ICT; Big Data; Privacy and Sur-
veillance; Artificial Intelligence and impact on Social structure,
Commercialization of Social Informatics.
HSS F248 Introduction to Disability Studies 3 0 3
Critical interdisciplinary field: socio-cultural and historico-political
perspectives of disability. Historical construction of ablebodied-
ness, normalcy, disability, abnormality. Disability-centred critique
of medical technologies and psychiatric practices. Culturally dif-
ferent ways of knowing body-minds. Disability in relation to other
bio-social differences like gender, caste, class, race and sexuali-
ty. Disability expressions: life writing, autism narratives, sign-
language poetry, crip performances.
HSS F249 Politics in India 3 0 3
Institutional Setting of the State; Transformed structures of politi-
cal power; Constitutionalism; Parliament; The Party System; So-
cial Cleavages; Identity, Class, Caste and Religion in Politics;
Politics and National Identity; Political Processes; Political Par-
ties; Social Justice; Social Movements; Politics and Redistribu-
tion
HSS F250 Comics and Visual Culture 3 0 3
A historical and cultural examination of popular visual culture;
case studies from comic books, manga, graphic novels, memes,
and caricatures; transnational approach spanning India, Japan,
and America; visual methodologies; critical theory on culture in-
dustry, political satire, patriarchy, and public morality; intersec-
tions of class, caste, gender, and racial violence in visual media.
HSS F251 Introduction to Discourse and Conversa-2 1 3
tional Analysis
History and background of discourse analysis; relationship of
discourse and society; patterns in text organization; genres and
text types; stance of writers; patterns in talk and conversations;
stance of speakers; databases and corpora; methodologies and
tools for conversation analysis.
HSS F252 International Law 3 0 3
services; Theories of International Law: Realism, idealism, and
other schools; Process of making of international laws; Role of
international institutions in the making of international law; Law
of treaties, ratification, reservation and withdrawal process; In-
ternational courts and tribunals; State and international law,,
recognition of states, statehood, sovereignty; Evolution of law of
the seas and air space; High seas as global commons; Law re-
lated to freedom of navigation on high seas and airspace; Digital
sovereignty and international cyber laws, data theft and breach
of privacy; International environmental law; International climate
change treaty; Law to protect biosphere; Legal aspects of inter-
national sanctions; Rule of law in international politics: Use and
abuse.
HSS F266 Study Project 3
These courses include projects which are oriented towards read-
ings from published literature or books about new frontiers of
development or analysis of available database. These courses
are normally available to students in second or higher levels.
These courses must coterminate with project reports.
HSS F311 Introduction to Videogame Studies 3 0 3
Introduction to videogames- a brief history of video-
games, game studies as a multidisciplinary academic field, play
and game- deconstructing videogames: narrative structures of
I-64
videogames, critiquing rules in videogames, immersion and ma-
teriality- puzzles, drama and socio-technical system
of video games- Themes of videogames: violence, addiction,
language, sexuality, gender, identity, communities, values and
ethics- game genres: e-sports, indie games, serious games-
gamification, game design; developing story, action and charac-
ters in videogames- Game market and econom-
ics, game journalism.
HSS F312 Bureaucracy 3 0 3
Course description is to be developed.
HSS F313 Introduction to Contemporary Arts 3 0 3
Methodologies of viewing contemporary art and its cultural, polit-
ical, Philosophical and environmental underpinnings- the basic
principles of Western and Eastern art - Indian art history at a
glance - different mediums of artistic practice through the ages -
modern art- connecting art and technology.
HSS F314 Maritime Governance and Naval Diplomacy 3 0 3
A comprehensive idea on the growth of maritime history, evolu-
tion of maritime economies, conventional and evolving strategic
concerns, responses and naval diplomacy- Maritime communi-
ties: structures, changes and influences Evolution, Growth &
Development of Maritime Transportation -Maritime Mobility-
Growth of Ancillary Sector- Maritime Issues & India International
Port & Shipping Economy- National, Regional & International
Maritime Security Paradigms- Maritime Governance
HSS F315 Society, Business and Politics 3 0 3
Course description is to be developed.
HSS F316 Popular Literature and Culture of South 3 0 3
Asia
South Asia as a region; culture and its representation through
literature and cinema; politics of representation, breaking the
stereotypes; bringing in the marginalized voices; writings of
women; identity formation; concept of majority and minority;
commonality in spite of all the differences, violence, migration
and dislocation.
HSS F317 Introduction to Globalization 3 0 3
Main themes and concepts: Globalization, Globalism, Localiza-
tion, Glocalization; Dimensions of Globalization: Social, cultural,
economic, political and ideological; Processes related to Globali-
zation: Internationalization, Westernization, Americanization,
Neo- Colonialization; Relationship with issues of environment,
city, consumption, media, inequality; Development; Impact and
consequences of Globalization in India; Challenges and future of
Globalization: Anti-Americanization and Anti-Globalization
Movements.
HSS F318 Introduction to Anthropology 3 0 3
Introduction to Social and Biological Anthropology: Human Na-
ture, Race, Evolution; Sex, Gender, Family; Archaeology: Do-
mestication, Agriculture, and Civilization; Cultural Anthropology:
Nature of Culture, and Cultural Relativism; Nature of Language
and Languages.
HSS F319 Lighting for Theatre and Films 2*
Design principles and elements of design; lighting instruments;
lighting mechanics, rigging and focusing lights; color and color
theory, psychology of color, color mixing; lighting paper works,
lighting for play, opera, thrust, musical, proscenium, arena and
films.
HSS F323 Organizational Psychology 3 0 3
Industrial/Organizational Psychology, Hawthorne Studies, Lead-
ership-Theories, Motivation-Concepts, Personality & Values:
Strengths & Weaknesses, Employee Issues: Recruitment, Train-
ing & Development, Organizational Change & Development-
Psychosocial Aspects, Organizational Culture & Climate, Work-
Family Balance, Stress and its Management, Positive Organiza-
tional Psychology.
HSS F325 Cinematic Adaptation 3 0 3
Essentials of literature; types and characteristics of literary writ-
ings: story and plot, character, theme, setting, point of view, inci-
dents, characters, and dialogues; film history, types of adapta-
tions; features of adaptations; importance of adaptations; trend
VI
of adaptations; process of adaptation; cinematic text; essentials
of cinema: dialogues, text, screenplay, etc.; critical analysis of
adaptations; current trends and challenges.
HSS F326 Humanities and Design 2 2 3
Ideas and Designs, Thinking about New Designs, Perspectives
to Design: Historical, Social, Technical and Creative Dimen-
sions; Engineering Design and Problem Solving; Basic Concepts
in Engineering Design; Design Skills, Abstraction, Identification
of Patterns in Processes and Products, Application of Systemat-
ic Techniques to Problem Solving, Application and Adaptation of
tools and technologies to new problems; Core Principles of De-
sign; Elements of Design, Form and Functionality, Central Activi-
ty of Engineering Designs; Language and Interface Design, De-
sign Thinking: Influence of Context Vs. Conflict with Context.
HSS F327 Contemporary Drama 3 0 3
Course description is to be developed.
HSS F328 Human Resource Development 3 0 3
The strategic role of human resources management; human re-
source development – concept, goal, mechanism, and design
the system; manpower planning and policies; staffing process-
recruitment & placement, job analysis, selection, managing em-
ployee separation, downsizing and outplacement; maintaining &
developing people- training & development, developing manag-
ers, appraising performance, managing career, employee remu-
neration; governance- developing employee relations & commu-
nication, respective employee rights & managing discipline;
trade union; managing safety & health.
HSS F329 Musicology – An Introduction 3 0 3
Music and it's philosophy, history of music, different theories re-
garding the development of music, music as an exact science
(mathematics), musical terminology, musical forms and their
background, composers, artistes and their contributions, music
of different cultures, music and film world, music therapy. Em-
phasis would be laid on research and knowledge gained through
self-experience.
HSS F330 Appreciation of Art 3 0 3
Visual perception and basic techniques used in art, composi-
tional balance, space, movement form, light colour, texture, ten-
sions, expressions lines; mainstreams of art; influence of Indian
art abroad; various schools of art-Greecian, Medieval, Christian
Renaissance, Baroque and Romanticism, impressionism and
post impressionism, fauvism, futurism, expressionism, Dadaism
and surrealism, metaphysical art, non-representational and ab-
stract art; analysis of work of art and their evaluation.
HSS F331 Sankara’s Thoughts 3 0 3
Life and achievements of Adi Sankara; pre-Sankara Vedanta;
basic concepts and theories of Advaita: Atman and Jeeva, na-
ture, sources and validity of knowledge, Brahman and Isvara,
Maya and World, Avidya, bondage and liberation; Sankara's
contribution to Indian heritage.
HSS F332 Cinematic Art 3
Cinema as an art form; elements of cinema; defining form, style
types, rhyme as adopted in global cinema; new idiom in Indian
cinema; experimental techniques; evolution of the language of
cinema; analysis of Japanese, Swedish, American, French and
Indian cinema ; theatre and cinema.
HSS F333 Comparative Religion 3 0 3
A clear objective description of the great religions and their ap-
peal to the spiritual aspirations of the different people of the
world; a comparative non-sectarian approach to the understand-
ing of Hinduism, Buddhism, Islam and Christianity; a final sum-
ming up bringing the unity of all religions of the world.
HSS F334 Srimad Bhagavad Gita 3 0 3
The science of Soul; Reincarnation; Karma; Karma Yoga; Tran-
scendental Knowledge; Action in Krishna consciousness;
Dhyana Yoga; Knowledge of the Ablolute; Attaining the Su-
preme; The process of Transmigration; the most confidential
knowledge; Bhakti Yoga – The process to go back home, back
to Godhead.
HSS F335 Literary Criticism 3 0 3
I-65
Aristotle, Dryden, Johnson, Coleridge, Arnold, Eliot.
HSS F336 Modern Fiction 3 0 3
E.M. Forster, Virginia Woolf, Joseph Conrad, Aldous Huxley,
D.H. Lawrence.
HSS F337 English Literary Forms and Movements 3 0 3
This course is designed to provide a historical perspective on
major forms and movements in English Literature and to develop
an insight into various social, religious and other influences on
their birth and growth. The course will cover the entire range of
literature from renaissance and reformation to modern times.
HSS F338 Comparative Indian Literature 3 0 3
This course is intended to acquaint the students with literary
achievements in Indian Languages and their home-environment
and to give integrated view of Indian literature, literary selections
from the best writers in the Indian languages will be studied.
HSS F339 Theatre Art-Acting and Production 3 0 3
General historical background of theatre; general knowledge of
acting; its tools and exercises; voice training and practice; a
study of stage; various systems of theatres; rehearsal tech-
niques and stage management.
HSS F340 Post Colonial Literature 3 0 3
Introduction to Post colonial discourses; Post Co-lonial Con-
cepts: Colonization, De-colonization, Linguistic colonization,
Politics of representation, Orientalism, Euro-centrism, Hybridiza-
tion, Select Literary Texts.
HSS F341 Performance Design 3 0 3
Study of a dramatic text and its genre, structure; plot, time,
theme and its development, character;music and spectacles;
conceiving scenography: basic principles of design; reading the
hidden image in the text; performance and show; organizing per-
forming space, conceiving light, music, and sound;staging the
show: final production.
HSS F342 Advanced Communicative English 3 0 3
Pronunciation, Accent, Intonation, Vocabulary, Active Listening,
Conversation, Group Discussion,Dynamics of Writing, Art of
condensation, Dictogloss, Critical Essays, Academic Essays,
Term Paper, Book Review.
HSS F343 Professional Ethics 3 0 3
Ethics, nature and purpose; ethical theories; ethics in business
and management; ethics in engineering, global ethical issues.
HSS F344 Heritage of India 3 0 3
Foundations of India; India and her ancient culture; life of the
people; systems of Indian philosophy; art and archaeology; lan-
guages and literature; impact on world civilization; Western in-
fluence.
HSS F345 Gandhian Thoughts 3 0 3
Sources of Gandhian thoughts, metaphysical convictions, ethical
principles, ends and means; Gandhi and religion; theory of sat-
yagraha; political thought; economic thought; social reforms; un-
touchability; Gandhi and Muslims; Gandhi and women; some
items of constructive programme, Gandhi and Marx; his nonvio-
lent state; Gandhism after Gandhi.
HSS F346 International Relations 3 0 3
Rise of nationalism, World War I, Interregnum; World War II and
after; bi-polar politics and detente; instruments for promotion of
national interest; diplomacy; propaganda and political warfare;
integration of Western Europe; West Asia and world politics;
panchsheel and nonalignment; major national foreign policies--
USA, USSR, UK and Pakistan; disarmament; UN and World
peace.
HSS F347 Introduction to Carnatic Music 3 0 3
Origins and History of Carnatic music; Basic concepts of svara,
svaravalis, svarasthanas, aarohana, avarohana, sthayis; Con-
cept of laya, tala, gati, nadai, different jaati's of taalams; Concept
of raaga, Melakarta and janya; Ragalakshanam for some specif-
ic raagas; Notation of svaras, taalam; Brief biography of the Trin-
ity, Purandaradasa, and other major composers; Concert for-
mats and styles; Vocal or instrumental exercises including var-
VI
isais, Saptataala alankaaras, Geetams, svarajati, keertanams;
Listening practice.
HSS F348 Introduction to Hindustani Music 3 0 3
Origins of Hindustani music and evolution of the style; Basic
concepts of melody and rhythm: Naad, Dhwani, Sangeet, Swar,
Laya, Raag, Taal, Shuddh- Vikrit, Chal-Achal, Mandra-Madhya-
Taar, Poorvang – Uttarang, Saptak - Ashtak, Sthayee – Antara,
Aroha- Avaroha, Raag-Jati, Tal Jati, Alap-Tan, Varn, Alankar,
Pakad, Bandish, Vilambit-Madhya-Drut, Matra, Theka, Vibhag,
Tali, Khali, Sam. Raaga, Thaat, raag vivara; Compositions: kha-
yals, dhrupad, taraana etc; Vocal or instrumental exercises in-
cluding ten alankars, Identification of svaras, Aroh, avaroh and
pakad of simple raags viz. Yaman, Bhoop, Khamaj, Des, Kafi,
Bhimpalasi, Bageshri, Durga; Sargam geets, lakshan geets and
madhyalay khayals; Taals including Trital, kaharva, daadra; Lis-
tening, identification of raaga from simple phrases.
HSS F349 Ecocriticism 3 0 3
Defining Ecocriticism; Interdisciplinarity; Ecosystem and Biodi-
versity; Ecology and Environment; Developmental Ecology; Eco-
critical Concepts; Literary Ecocriticism; Application of Ecocritical
Principles in Literature - tinai Criticism; Deep Ecology; Biore-
gionalism - Cultural Ecocriticism; Ecocinema - Debates on An-
thropocentrism and Biocentrism/Ecocentrism; Food documen-
taries; Animal Studies; Ecophobia; Gaia Theory; Ecocriticism
and Society; Ecopolitics and Activism; Ecospirituality and Ecos-
ophy; Practical Ecocriticism.
HSS F350 Human Rights: History, Theory & Practice 3 0 3
The meaning and history of human rights; Human rights debates
and controversies; Political, civil, social and economic rights;
Culture and human rights; Themes - Democracy, dictatorship,
and human rights; Science, technology, and human rights; Eth-
nicity; Gender; Children’s rights and others;Evaluating the pro-
gress made and challenges in practice of human rights.
HSS F351 Social and Political Ecology 3 0 3
Environmental History and Social construction of nature; Theo-
retical perspectives on Natural Resource use; Ecological Devel-
opment; Natural Resource Governance; Ecological Identity and
Social Movement-Gender-based dimensions; Degradation and
Marginalization; Conservation and Control; Ecotourism; Urban
Ecology; Regional case studies.
HSS F352 Technology, Work and Society 3 0 3
Work during and after Industrial Revolution; Major theoretical
contributions to the study of Work; Technology and its impact on
work in the 21st century; Work and self in the service industry;
Work and self among professionals and managers; Changes in
Culture of Work; Domestic labor and the politics of household
work; Modern distinction between work and family.
HSS F353 Philosophy of Aesthetics 3 0 3
Fundamental questions related to art, its purpose and manifesta-
tions as well as foundational problems such as, ideology, ontol-
ogy, values attached, implicit/explicit meanings, connections with
other disciplines, social manifestations and implications, histori-
cal contexts, mediums and representations. Important Indian
and Western perspectives on aesthetics through music, litera-
ture, painting and cinema, contextualizing them in history.
HSS F354 Introduction to Islamic Economy 3 0 3
Islamic Finance and Islamic digital economy, Halal industries,
Halal tourism, Islamic art and design, Islamic economy stand-
ards and certification, and Islamic information and education.
HSS F355 Dictatorship, Democracy & Development 3 0 3
Overview of the relationship between political regimes and de-
velopment; how regimes matter: top-down interventions and bot-
tom-up pressures; key concepts: democracy, dictatorship, civil
society, social movements, social capital, human development;
survey of academic literature to understand “democracy ad-
vantage”; country studies: Brazil, China, India; relevance and
limitations of the relationship between political regime type and
development.
HSS F356 Social Movements and Protest Politics 3 0 3
I-66
Need for studying social movements ; origins, forms, trajectory,
outcomes of social movements ; key participants; protestors ob-
jectives, their achievements / failures ; the Civil Rights Move-
ment ; women’s movements in the US and Europe; pro-
democracy movements in Brazil; Islamic movements in the Mid-
dle East; The Christian Right in the US; the Hindu nationalist
movement in India ; Maoism in India; anti-corruption protests.
HSS F361 Urban Policy and Governance 3 0 3
Urban, urbanization, urbanism- the concepts; Major schools of
thought in urban sociology; Patterns of urbanization- World ur-
banization, third world and India; Urban processes- assimilation,
segregation, differentiation, suburbanization, Core-periphery, ur-
ban sprawl, primate city, right to city; Factors of urbanization-
Natural growth, migration and re-classification; The constitutional
and political dimensions of urbanization in India; Urban growth in
post-liberalization era and informal economy in cities; Urban
problems; Urban policy history in India and contemporary policy
measures; Future of urbanization in India.
HSS F362 Local Governance and Participation 3 0 3
Political role of Panchayat Raj - Decentralisation below state
level, Decentralised planning, Panchayati Raj Bills, Acts and
Constitutional amendments, Grassroots politics; Inclusiveness
and Participation - Women in Panchayati Raj, Impact of reserva-
tion in local bodies, Democracy and social capital, Local democ-
racy and clientelism; Functional and Financial Devolution - Fiscal
decentralisation to the sub-state level governments, Functional
devolution to local bodies, Federalism, urban decentralisation
and citizen participation, Poverty alleviation and efforts of pan-
chayats; Challenges and Prospects of Local Government and
Participation- Neighbourhood associations and local democracy,
Experiment with direct democracy, Law of two-child norm in
Panchayat, Beyond feminine public altruism.
HSS F363 Disaster and Development 3 0 3
Disaster and Development - Concepts and contemporary de-
bates, How disasters impact development, How development
can induce vulnerability, Role of Planning in Disaster Manage-
ment; Disaster Risk Assessment - Risk and Uncertainty, Multi-
hazard analysis, Vulnerability and Capacity analysis, Risk evalu-
ation and decision making; Mainstreaming Disaster Risk Reduc-
tion into Development - Mainstreaming of Frameworks and tools,
Policies, Plans and Regulations, Challenges: data and modelling
limitation, political and economic consideration; Disaster Man-
agement Planning - Need and impact assessment, Business
Continuity Plan (BCP), Response and recovery planning.
HSS F364 Political Economy of Gulf Cooperation 3 0 3
Council States
Overview of Gulf History and Society: History in a nutshell; Reli-
gion, Language, Identity and Culture, Rentier State, Citizenship;
Political and Social Change in the Gulf: Nationalism, Rule of Law
and Political Liberalization, Gender and Participation; Media, Bu-
reaucracy and Civil Society Groups; Economic Reforms and
Governing Structure: State-Business Relations, Islamic Finance
Development, Oil based Economy to Knowledge Economy, Re-
source Curse, Labour Market & Migration Policies; International-
ization of the Gulf: Security and Strategic Trends, Foreign Policy
with International Reach, Environment, Energy, Maritime and
Sustainable Policies, Challenges in transition.
HSS F365 Science of Sustainable Happiness 3 0 3
Introduction to Science of Happiness; What Determines Happi-
ness; Happiness Model and Model of Sustainable Happiness;
Power of Social Connection; Managing Stress, Hardship, and
Trauma; Living in the Present, Committing to Your Goals; Com-
passion and Kindness; Cooperation and Reconciliation; Mindful-
ness; Gratitude; Mental Habits of Happiness; If You are De-
pressed; New Frontiers and Happiness “Fit”; Five Hows Behind
Sustainable Happiness; Sustainability, Happiness and Educa-
tion.
HSS F368 Asian Cinemas and Cultures 3 0 3
Introduction; The ideas of Asia; Asia as method; India andher
neighbors; BRICS and ASEAN; Look East Policy;Cinema, Cul-
ture and Diplomacy; Cinema as Soft Power;Asian diaspora cin-
ema; Indian Diaspora in the East;Cinemas from the Middle East;
Iranian Cinema after theRevolution; Cinemas of & on the Israel-
VI
Palestine conflict-New Asian Metros; Thai Cinema and the glob-
al auteur;South Korean history through their Cinema; Filipino
NewWave, Taiwanese New Wave; Chinese Cinemas after
theCultural Revolution; Asianization of the West; India’sCine-
Cultural Negotiations with her Asian Neighbors.
HSS F369 Caste and Gender in India 3 0 3
Concepts - Caste and Gender; Materialist and religioustheories;
Caste Ideologies; Caste, class and genderintersections, Gender
construction within castes; GradedPatriarchies; Colonial impact
on caste and gender; Casteand Gender in contemporary period;
Oppositional narrativesto caste and gender construction; Legal
interventions.
HSS F371 Cities-Life, Issues and Conflicts 3 0 3
The origin and growth of city; Theories and paradigms of cities;
Spatial, socio-economic, political and cultural perspectives of cit-
ies; Social psychology of cities; Conflicts and changes within a
city; City and the environment; Globalization impact on urban
development in the Indian context.
HSS F372 Introduction to Social Psychology 3 0 3
Interaction between human and social situation; social environ-
ment and people and vice versa; fundamental theories; con-
cepts; research methods in social psychology; past and present
research related to social psychology; application of social psy-
chological concepts to understand real life situation; social per-
ception, social cognition; group dynamics; aggression; applica-
tion of social psychology in law, health, and organizational sec-
tor; impact of social networking on life.
HSS F373 Shakespeare and Popular Culture 3 0 3
Renaissance political exigencies of government and theater;
Shakespeare as popular culture in renaissance England; Shake-
speare adaptations; case study of hamlet; the prince’s right to
govern; use of political force; early modern cultural expectations
of the governed; renaissance individual’s reliance of fortune;
Machiavelli’s The Prince; Castiglione’s the book of the courtier.
Recent popular representations of Hamlet; cotemporary rele-
vance; nature of artistic composition; the discursive nature of the
relationship between the past the present.
HSS F374 Urban Modernity and the Renewal of Paris 3 0 3
1850s – 1870s Street level reform; hygiene; circulation of capital;
Modernity and Urban planning; theoretical background of urban
planning; role of Baron Haussmann; notion of any modern city;
political and artistic effects of urban planning; advertising and
modern consumer culture in 1850s – 1870s.
HSS F375 Business and Politics in Colonial and Post 3 0 3
Colonial India: a historical approach
Introduction to Indian Economic history; Dominant paradigms;
Historical origins of Indian business, Caste, community networks
and diaspora in early modern India and the Indian Ocean; Work-
ings and impact of colonial rule on the Indian economy; Industri-
alization in India- challenges and way forward; Bazar economy;
Indian capitalism; Business and Politics; Premier business
houses and their strategies. The Informal sector; Business in
new India.
HSS F378 Cinemas of India: From Past to Present 3 0 3
The emergence of cinema in India; early cinematic forms in In-
dia; the studio era; the rise of language cinema in India; social
and mythological as popular film genres; melodramatic mode of
Indian cinema; national and regional cinemas from India; Indian
cinema and modernity; realism and Indian cinema; Indian new
wave; Indian documentary films; star system and cine-politics;
corporatisation of Indian film industries; media convergence and
Indian cinema; gender and figuration in Indian cinema; Indian
cinema after digital turn; indie cinematic practices from India.
HSS F379 Introduction to Philosophy of Science 3 0 3
Introduction; Philosophy and science, Science and pseudo-
science, Focal questions of philosophy of science, Philosophical
roots of science; ancient and modern, Nature of scientific rea-
soning; deduction and induction, Problem of induction, Inference
to the best explanation; arguments for and against, Induction-
Probability connection; Scientific explanations; Causality, Meta-
physics of science; realism and anti-realism, Scientific change
and scientific revolutions; Kuhn - paradigm shift, incommensura-
I-67
bility, theory-ladenness; Philosophical problems in science;
Physics – absolute space, Biology – species problem and classi-
fication, Psychology – Architecture of mind; Criticism of science;
Values in science.
HSS F399 Introduction to American Literature 3 0 3
Socio-cultural and literary history of the United States since the
landing of the Pilgrims from The Mayflower to the decisive Amer-
ican victory over the Axis powers in World War II. (1500-1700)
Etablishment of Plymouth Plantation and the establishment of
early Puritanism. (1700-1800) Influence of Enlightenment
thought on American life and letters and Consequences of the
Revolutionary War on literature. (1800-1865): American Literary
Nationalism, the westward expansion, and the American Civil
War. ( 1865-1914): Reconstruction period, Mexican War, imperi-
al expansion to the Southwest, building of transcontinental rail-
roads, the American frontier issue, industrialization and trans-
formation of American life and their effects on the literary mar-
ketplace. (1914-1945): the two world wars, the Great Depres-
sion, Modernism and Modernity in American life and letters, Har-
lem Renaissance, increasing presence of science and technolo-
gy in everyday American life.
HSS G511 Philosophical Foundations of Liberal Stud-3 2 5
ies
Idea of being; modes of being; causation; metaphysicaleduca-
tion; natural education; social education;refutation of metaphys-
ics; concept of necessity;humanism; epistemology; search for
the method ofscience; Reasoning – constructing Arguments-
Standards for constructing and evaluating arguments;validity,
truth, and soundness; Fallacies; Project
HSS G512 Theoretical Approaches to Liberal Studies 3 2 5
Introduction to Ideologies in Social Sciences;Developmentalism,
Political Culture, Sociologicalapproaches; Psychoanalysis as
bridging the fields ofhumanities, natural and social sciences; In-
stitutionsand institutionalism; Irrationalism; Environmental-
ism;Sociobiology; The present as post; Culture,Intellectuals and
Media; Indigenous theories of change;Project
HSS N201T Intro to Photography* 3 0 3
HSS N202T Ind C Dance Bharatnatyam* 3 0 3
*Course Description is to be developed
HSS N203T Basic Arabic 3 0 3
Arabic of basic level, Recognition of Arabic alphabets with its dif-
ferent writing patterns, Phonetics and peculiar Arabic sounds,
Familiarity with the basic vocabulary, Familiarity with profession
specific words and phrases, Grammar, Sentence patterns and
expressions for daily communication, Reading, writing, listening
and speaking skills at initial level, Focus on modern standard
Arabic and its comparison with colloquial and local dialect, exer-
cises and practice.
HSS N301T Elements of Dance 1 1 2
Introduction to elements of dance; dance sense; dance pathway;
relationship of dance with culture, society, geography and arts;
dance workout, salsa, ballet, folk, classical, contemporary, musi-
cal theatre
Humanities
HUM G511 Introduction to Health Systems 3 0 3
Health facilities for SC/ST; Health Systems; Evolution of Medi-
cine; Sociology, health and medicine; Primary health care;
Health Development; Health education; Health policy in India;
Issueslike euthanasia, consumer forums, child labor; Female in-
fanticide; women's health; Role of hospitals; Advances in Public
Health; Communications; Evaluation of National Health Sys-
tems; Demography; Family Planning; Psycho-social issues.
Instrumentation
INSTR F211 Electrical Machines 3 1 4
Transformer: Constructional features, equivalent circuit and
phasor diagram - regulation and efficiency, parallel operation.
Three phase transformer connections; Harmonic in transformers;
Testing; Phase conversion; Autotransformer. D.C Machines:
Construction, armature windings, armature voltage and torque
equations, classification. D.C generators, performance charac-
VI
teristics; D.C motors - torque/speed characteristics, speed con-
trol and braking. Testing and efficiency. Induction machines:
Constructional features and rotating magnetic field. Circuit model
and phasor diagram. Steady state characteristics. Testing, start-
ing and speed control. Time harmonics and space harmonics.
Wound rotor induction motors, Single phase induction motors -
classification and equivalent circuit. Synchronous machines:
Constructional features; synchronous generators and motors;
equivalent circuit and phasor diagram; power and torque charac-
teristics and capability curves. Parallel operation. Salient pole
synchronous machine - phasor diagram and determination of
synchronous reactances; starting and speed control of synchro-
nous motors. Special machinesuniversal motors, Induction gen-
erators.
INSTR F212 Electromagnetic Theory 3 0 3
Review of mathematics - scalar and vector fields, calculus of
scalar and vector fields in Cartesian and curvilinear coordinates,
Dirac delta function; Electrostatics - electric field, divergence &
curl of e(cid:10) lectric field, electric potential, work and energ y in elec-
trostatics, conductors, electric dipole; Electrostatics in Matter -
polarization and field of a polarized object, electric displacement,
linear dielectrics; Magnetostatics - Lorentz force law, Biot-Savart
law, divergence & curl of magnetic field, magnetic vector poten-
tial, magnetic dipole; Magnetostatics in matter - magnetization
and field of a magnetized object, the H-field, linear & non-linear
magnetic media; Electrodynamics - electromotive force, electro-
magnetic induction, Maxwell's equations in free space, plane
wave solutions of Maxwell’s equations in free space.
INSTR F214 Electronic Devices 3 0 3
Crystal structure and growth of semiconductor, electrical con-
duction in solids, Elementary quantum physics (Photoelectric ef-
fect, uncertainty principle, Schrodinger wave equation and tun-
neling), energy bands in solids, charge carriers in semiconduc-
tors, excess carriers in semiconductors, Fabrication of p-n junc-
tions, equilibrium conditions, forward and reverse biased junc-
tions, metal semiconductor junctions Bipolar junction transistors,
field effect transistors (JFET, HEMT, MOSFET),Special diodes
(varactor diode, solar cell, LEDs, Tunnel diode and HBT), dielec-
tric materials and insulation (Polarization mechanisms, frequen-
cy dependence, dielectric strength and insulation breakdown).
INSTR F215 Digital Design 3 1 4
Boolean Algebra & logic minimization; combinational logic cir-
cuits : arithmetic circuit design , Design using MSI components;
Sequential Logic Circuits : flip flops & latches, registers and
counters, Finite state machine ; HDL Implementation of Digital
circuits; Digital Integrated Circuits; Programmable logic devices;
Memory organization ; Algorithmic State machine; Introduction to
computer organization; The course will also have laboratory
component on digital design.
INSTR F216 Electronic Devices Simulation Laboratory 0 2 2
Hands on simulation experience of Electronic Devices (Diodes,
BJTs, MOSFET and MOS Capacitor) using Sentarus TCAD;
Simulation of electrostatics of various Electronic Devices and
their effects on the device performance.
Pre-requisites:
EEE F214 / INSTR F214 / ECE F214 : Electronic Devices
INSTR F241 Microprocessors and Interfacing 3 1 4
Programmers model of processor, processor architecture; In-
struction set, modular assembly programming using subroutines,
macros etc.; Timing diagrams; Concept of interrupts: hardware &
software interrupts, Interrupt handling techniques, Interrupt con-
trollers; Types of Memory & memory interfacing; Programmable
Peripheral devices and I/O Interfacing ; DMA controller and its
interfacing: Design of processor based system. This course will
have laboratory component.
INSTR F242 Control Systems 3 0 3
Modeling and classification of dynamical systems, Properties
and advantages of feedback systems, time-domain analysis,
frequency-domain analysis, stability and performance analysis,
State space analysis, controller design.
INSTR F243 Signals & Systems 3 0 3
This course is intended to provide a comprehensive coverage of
I-68
Signals and Systems, a fundamental subject of Electrical Engi-
neering. The topics covered are: Continuous-time and discrete
time signals and systems, convolution, properties of linear time-
invariant (LTI) systems, Fourier series, Fourier transform, Z
transform, Laplace transform; System analysis, frequency re-
sponse, analog filters, Sampling and reconstruction.
INSTR F244 Microelectronic Circuits 3 0 3
Basic microelectronic circuit analysis and design, biasing in dis-
crete and integrated circuit amplifiers, an overview of modeling
of microelectronic devices single and two transistor amplifier
configurations with passive and active loads; current mirrors &
current sources; single-ended and differential linear amplifiers ,
differential and multistage amplifiers; 2 stage CMOS OPAMP,
frequency response of amplifiers; negative feedback in amplifi-
ers, R-C frequency compensation.
INSTR F266 Study Project 3
These courses include projects which are oriented towards read-
ings from published literature or books about new frontiers of
development or analysis of available database. These courses
are normally available to students in second or higher levels.
These courses must coterminate with project reports.
INSTR F311 Electronic Instrumentation & Instrumenta-3 1 4
tion Technology
Electronic indicating, display, recording and analysis instru-
ments, signal generators, frequency synthesizer, counters, ele-
ments of design, grounding and shielding, electronic circuits
manufacturing technology, metrology, standards in quality man-
agement, instrumentation in hazardous area, industrial commu-
nication techniques.
INSTR F312 Transducers and Measurement Systems 3 0 3
Importance and types of measurement, generalized measure-
ment system, functional elements, static & dynamic characteris-
tics, primary sensing elements, passive transducers, active
transducers, inverse transducers, fiber optic transducers, MEMS
based transducers, measurement techniques for motion, seis-
mic, pressure, flow, temperature, level, humidity, pH, viscosity;
signal conditioning techniques using bridge, op-amp, instrumen-
tation amplifier, carrier, chopper, charge, isolation amplifier, data
converters, filters, modulators; data acquisition systems.
INSTR F313 Analog & Digital VLSI Design 3 0 3
Moore’s Law, Y chart, MOS device models including Deep Sub-
Micron effects; an overview of fabrication of CMOS circuits, par-
asitic capacitances, MOS scaling techniques, latch up, matching
issues, common centroid geometries in layout. Digital circuit de-
sign styles for logic, arithmetic and sequential blocks design; de-
vice sizing using logical effort; timing issues (clock skew and jit-
ter) and clock distribution techniques; estimation and minimiza-
tion of energy consumption; Power delay trade-off, interconnect
modelling; memory architectures, memory circuits design, sense
amplifiers; an overview of testing of integrated circuits. Basic and
cascaded NMOS/PMOS/CMOS gain stages, Differential amplifi-
er and advanced OPAMP design , matching of devices, mis-
match analysis, CMRR, PSRR and slew rate issues, offset volt-
age , advanced current mirrors; current and voltage references
design, common mode feedback circuits, Frequency response,
stabilty and noise issues in amplifiers; frequency compensation
techniques.
INSTR F341 Analog Electronics 3 1 4
Introduction to operational amplifiers: The difference amplifier
and the ideal operational amplifier models, concept of negative
feedback and virtual short; Analysis of simple operational ampli-
fier circuits; Effects of real operational amplifier parameters on
circuit performance. Linear applications of operational amplifiers:
Instrumentation and Isolation amplifiers; Current and voltage
sources; Active filters. Non-linear applications of operational
amplifiers: Comparators; Linearization amplifiers; Logarithmic
amplifiers, multifunction modules & circuits, true rms convertors,
Precision and signal conditioning circuits, Waveform Generation:
sinusoidal and non-sinusoidal signal generation; Wave shape
converters. Timer 555 based circuits, Phase lock loop circuits &
applications, IC regulators, Output stage and large signal ampli-
fiers, Power amplifiers, Tuned amplifiers, Analog and Digital in-
VI
terface circuits: A/D, D/A Converters.
INSTR F342 Power Electronics 3 1 4
Need for power conversion; Power electronic converters: classi-
fications and scope; Power semiconductor switches: diodes,
SCR , GTO and transistors (BJT, MOSFET and IGBT): Ratings,
static and dynamic characteristics, drive and switching aid cir-
cuits and cooling; DC to DC conversion: Buck, Boost and Buck-
Boost converters: circuit configuration and analysis with different
kinds of loads; Choppers: single quadrant and two quadrant op-
eration with DC motor load and steady state analysis; Rectifiers:
single phase and three phase operation, power factor, harmon-
ics and effect of source inductance; Dual converters; Drive con-
cept: Four quadrant drive and load characteristics, selection of
motor, control and stability of electric drives, feed back control of
drives; DC motor drive; Inverters: single phase and three phase
bridge inverters and PWM inverters; Single phase AC voltage
regulators and cycloconverter; Induction motor drive - Variable
frequency operation of 3- phase induction motor, stator voltage
control and V/f control methods; Non-drive application of power
electronic converters: UPS, active power line conditioner, elec-
tronic ballast and induction.
INSTR F343 Industrial Instrumentation and Control 3 0 3
Importance of process control, elements of process loop, math-
ematical modeling, dynamic closed loop characteristics, control-
ler principles & tuning, direct digital loop, hydraulic controllers,
pneumatic controllers, electronic controllers, complex & multivar-
iable control schemes, final control elements, P& I diagrams,
PLCs, Distributed Control Systems (DCS), AI techniques: expert
systems, neural networks, fuzzy logic, genetic algorithms & ap-
plications.
INSTR F366 Lab Project 3
INSTR F367 Lab Project 3
These courses include projects involving laboratory investigation
or laboratory development in the students discipline or interdis-
ciplinary areas. These courses are normally available to stu-
dents in third or higher levels. These courses must coterminate
with project reports.
INSTR F376 Design Project 3
INSTR F377 Design Project 3
These courses are intended to impart training in design of prod-
uct/ process or other artifact to the students in the discipline or
interdisciplinary areas. These courses are normally available to
students in third or higher levels. These courses must cotermi-
nate with project reports.
INSTR F411 Opto-Electronic Instruments 3 0 3
Optical radiation-its emission, control and detection; optical sig-
nal processing; amplifiers and associated electronic equipments.
Opto-electronic system design-calorimeters, spectrophotome-
ters, flame photometers, fluorimeter and turbidimeters; project
equipments; introduction to laser-based instruments.
INSTR F412 Analysis Instrumentation 3 0 3
Generalized configuration of an analysis instrument. Off-line
analysis instruments: emission spectrometers, UV/VIS/IR ab-
sorption spectrophotometers, flame emission and atomic ab-
sorption spectrophotometers, X-ray fluorescence spectrometer
and diffractometer, NMR and mass spectrometers, pH-meters,
gas chromatographs, electrochemical instruments, analytical
electron microscopes. On line analyzers: Sampling systems for
gases and liquids, fluid density monitors, consistency and vis-
cosity analysers, thermal conductivity gas analysers, paramag-
netic oxygen analysers, chemical composition analysers, on-line
instruments for measuring standard parameters, e.g. vapour
pressure, distillation characteristics, cloudpoint, pour point, flash
point etc. Recent developments.
INSTR F413 Advanced Process Control 3 0 3
Process identification and adaptive control; Model predictive
control structures; Model-based control structures; State estima-
tion; Synthesis of control systems-some case studies; intelligent
control.
INSTR F414 Telecommunication Switching Systems & 3 0 3
Networks
I-69
Intoduction, electromechanical switching, pulse dialing and
DTMF dialing, stored program control, space division switching,
speech digitization and transmission, time division switching,
fundamentals of traffic engineering, telephone networks, signal-
ing, data networks, layered architecture and protocols, LANs,
packet switching networks, TCP/IP, ISDN, ATM networks.
INSTR F415 Digital Control 3 0 3
Course Description is to be developed.
INSTR F419 Virtual Instrumentation 3 1 4
Fundamentals of virtual instrumentation--- Concept of virtual in-
strumentation – PC based data acquisition – Typical on board
DAQ card – Resolution and sampling frequency - Multiplexing of
analog inputs – Single-ended and differential inputs – Different
strategies for sampling of multi-channel analog inputs. Concept
of universal DAQ card - Use of timer-counter and analog outputs
on the universal DAQ card. Concepts of graphical programming
– Lab-view software – Concept of VIs and sub VI - Display types
– Digital – Analog – Chart – Oscilloscopic types – Loops – Case
and sequence structures - Types of data – Arrays – Formulae
nodes –Local and global variables – String and file I/O., Analysis
tools and simple applications :Fourier transform - Power spec-
trum - Correlation – Windowing and filtering tools – Simple tem-
perature indicator – ON/OFF controller – P-I-D controller - CRO
emulation - Simulation of a simple second order system.
INSTR F420 Design of Instrumentation Systems 3 0 3
Design of transducers, signal conditioning circuits, instrument air
system, control valve, control panel design, Human machine in-
terface, Reliability, Electronic product design, Noise reduction,
P&I diagrams, safety instrumentation systems, life cycle activi-
ties: requirement specifications, I&C system design and imple-
mentation, system integration, validation, operation mainte-
nance, case studies of ISD in various sectors.
INSTR F422 Instrumentation for Petrochemical Indus- 3 0 3
try
Petroleum Processing: Petroleum exploration – Recovery tech-
niques – Oil - Gas separation –Processing wet gases - refining
of crude oil, Unit Operations in Petroleum Industry: Measure-
ment in Petrochemical Industry: Parameter to be measured in
refinery and petrochemical industry – Selection and mainte-
nance of measuring instruments – Intrinsic safety of instruments
Control Loops in Petrochemical Industry: Process control in re-
finery and petrochemical industry – Control of distillation column
control of catalytic crackers and pyrolysis , Automatic control of
polyethylene production – Control on vinyl chloride and PVC
production.
INSTR F423 Electronic Material Design and Simula-1 2 3
tions Laboratory
Reviewing the basic Theory for Crystalline Solids (Crystal group,
real Space, reciprocal space), Introduction of the Concept of
Density Functional Theory (Many Electron Scenario, Born-
Oppenheimer Approximation, Hartree’s Formulation, Hohenberg
and Kohn Theorems, Energy Functional, Kohn Sham Scheme),
Familiarization with Quantum Espresso (Plane Wave Basis Set,
Exchange Correlation Functional, Pseudopotential, Brillouin
Zone Sampling, Quantum Espresso input file format), Theoreti-
cal Calculation of Structural Properties of Materials (Unit Cells
and Super Cells, Lattice Vectors, Ground-state Energy, Bond-
Length and Bond Angles), Theoretical Calculation of Electronic
Properties of Materials (Energy Band Profiles and Density of
States, Projected Density of States), Theoretical Calculation of
Optical Properties of Materials (Optical Spectrum), Introduction
of Doping in Materials (Effects on Electronic and Optical Proper-
ties), Introduction of Strain in Materials (Effects on Electronic
and Optical Properties) Simulation of 2D materials like Graphene
and MoS2.
Pre-requisites:
EEE F214 / INSTR F214 / ECE F214 : Electronic Devices
INSTR F424 Smart Grid for Sustainable Energy 3 0 3
Introduction to Smart grid, Renewable Power Generation and
Energy Storage, Microgrid, Power System Economics and Elec-
tricity Markets, Demand Response, Various Sensing, Communi-
cation, and Control technologies, and Application of Data Sci-
VI
ence.
Pre-requisites:
EEE F242 / INSTR F242 / ECE F242 : Control Systems
INSTR F428 Energy Storage Systems 3 0 3
Need of Energy Storage; Broad classification of Energy Storage
Systems and applications; Electrochemical Energy Storage Sys-
tems; Battery Storage; Application oriented choice of Batteries;
Electrical interface system design for Batteries with Renewable
Energy sources; Battery Management Systems (BMS); Hydro-
gen Energy Storage; Its application as Fuel cell, Electrical Ener-
gy Storage; Thermal Energy Storage; Mechanical Energy Stor-
age and their applications.
INSTR F432 Medical Instrumentation 3 0 3
Basic components of bio-medical instruments, bio-electric sig-
nals & recording electrodes, transducers, recording and display
devices. Patient care and monitoring systems, cardiovascular
measurements-blood pressure, blood flow, cardiac output, heart
sounds etc.; instrumentation for respiratory and nervous sys-
tems, analysis of EEG, ECG, EMG, EOG and action potentials,
non- invasive diagnostic measurements - temperature, ultrasonic
diagnosis, CAT scan techniques, sensory measurements-motor
response, analysis of behaviour etc. biotelemetry, biofeedback,
clinical laboratory instruments, X-ray diagnosis. Recent advanc-
es in biomedical instrumentation- microprocessor based sys-
tems, lasers & optical fiber based systems.
INSTR F473 Wind Electrical Systems 3 0 3
Thermodynamics of wind energy, Types of Wind energy conver-
sion devices, Aerodynamics of wind rotors, design of wind tur-
bine rotor, Power -speed characteristics, torque-speed charac-
teristics, Wind turbine control systems, Wind speed measure-
ments , Wind speed statistics, Site and turbine selection, Induc-
tion Generators, Wound field synchronous Generator, Perma-
nent Magnet synchronous machine, Doubly fed induction gener-
ator, Power Flow equations, Power Semiconductor devices,
Converters, Inverters, power quality, Reactive power compensa-
tion, Wind diesel hybrid systems, Wind photovoltaic systems,
Role of Govt. and policies for market development.
INSTR F491 Special Project 3
This is an unstructured open-ended course where under the
overall supervision of an instructor-in-charge, batches of stu-
dents will be attached to different instructors. Each batch will
work on a specific time-bound project which is of basic or pe-
ripheral concern of his discipline. Each student must submit a
project report as a culmination of his endeavour and investiga-
tion. The instructor- in-charge will determine the choice of the
project and also whether or not the project report is to be submit-
ted jointly by a group or individually by a student. The course will
aim to evaluate student's actual ability to use the fundamentals
of knowledge and to meet new unknown situations as demon-
strated by the students' interaction with the instructors and in-
structor-in- charge and aggregated in the project report. The in-
structor-in- charge may assign specific hours for formal brain-
storming sessions.
INSTR G611 Advanced Control Systems 3 2 5
Review of State variable modelling of linear continuous, linear
discrete and non linear control systems; Time varying systems;
Time domain solution; Controllability and observability; Stability;
direct method of Lyapunov; Modal control; OptimalControl Sys-
tem; Calculus of variation, Minimum principle, dynamic pro-
gramming, search techniques, Ricatti equation, Stochastic pro-
cesses and Stochastic estimation and control; Adaptive Control
system.
INSTR G612 Instrumentation Systems 3 2 5
Generalized approach to measuring systems; performance
characteristics of instruments; primary sensing elements and
transducers; analog and digital signal conditioning operations;
microprocessors in instrumentation; applied process control in-
strumentation; General purpose and analytical instruments cov-
ering spectroscopic, separation, atomic absorption instruments
UV-VIS-IR,GLC, HPLC, etc; Instrumentation practices in typical
R&D laboratories; instrumentation case studies covering selec-
tion, quality assurance, system design, etc; Hands on experi-
I-70
ence in operation of sophisticated instrumentation systems.
INSTR G621 Industrial Automation 3 2 5
Computer control theory, sampling of continuous time signals,
computer oriented mathematical models, discrete time systems,
and analysis of the same, translation of analog design, state
space design methods, pole-placement design based on in-
put/output models. Adaptive control principles, implementation of
digital controllers, model reference adaptive systems, self-tuning
regulators, stochastic adaptive control, auto-tuning, expert con-
trollers, learning systems and other applications.
Information Systems
IS F211 Data Structures & Algorithms 3 1 4
Introduction to Abstract Data Types, Data structures and Algo-
rithms; Analysis of Algorithms – Time and Space Complexity,
Complexity Notation, Solving Recurrence Relations.; Divide-and-
Conquer as a Design Technique; Recursion – Recursive Data
Types, Design of Recursive Functions / Procedures, Tail Recur-
sion, Conversion of Recursive Functions to Iterative Form. Line-
ar data structures – Lists, Access Restricted Lists (Stacks and
Queues); Searching and Order Queries. Sorting – Sorting Algo-
rithms (Online vs. Offline, In-memory vs. External, In-space vs.
Out-of-space, Quick Sort and Randomization), Lower Bound on
Complexity of Sorting Algorithms. Unordered Collections: Hash
tables (Separate Chaining vs. Open Addressing, Probing, Re-
hashing). Binary Trees – Tree Traversals. Partially Ordered Col-
lections: Search Trees and Height Balanced Search Trees,
Heaps and Priority Queues. Probabilistic/Randomized Data
Structures (such as Bloom Filters and Splay Trees). Generalized
Trees – Traversals and applications. Text Processing – Basic
Algorithms and Data Structures (e.g. Tries, Huffman Coding,
String search / pattern matching). External Memory Data struc-
tures (B-Trees and variants). Graphs and Graph Algorithms:
Representation schemes, Problems on Directed Graphs
(Reachability and Strong Connectivity, Traversals, Transitive
Closure. Directed Acyclic Graphs - Topological Sorting), Prob-
lems on Weighted Graphs (Shortest Paths. Spanning Trees).
IS F213 Object Oriented Programming 3 1 4
Object orientation concepts, theories and principles; fundamen-
tal concepts of the object model: classes, objects, methods and
messages, encapsulation and inheritance, interface and imple-
mentation, reuse and extension of classes, inheritance and pol-
ymorphism; overloading and overriding; static and dynamic bind-
ing; multithreaded programming; event handling and exception
handling; process of object oriented requirements specification,
analysis and design; notations for object-oriented analysis and
design; case studies and applications using some object orient-
ed programming languages. Object Oriented Design Patterns:
Behavioral, Structural and Creational.
IS F214 Logic in Computer Science 3 0 3
propositional logic – syntax, semantics, satisfiability & validity,
predicate or first order logic – syntax, semantics, satisfiability &
validity, completeness & compactness, Undecidability & incom-
pleteness; Godel’s incompleteness theorem; SAT solvers; verifi-
cation by model checking, linear-time temporal logic (LTL), &
computational tree logic (CTL). Program verification using Hoare
logic & proofs of correctness; Modal logic & logic programming
paradigm.
IS F222 Discrete Structures for Computer Science 3 0 3
Sets & operation on sets; relations & equivalence relations;
number theory; weak & strong form of mathematical induction;
principle of inclusion & exclusion, pigeonhole principle; recur-
rence relations & generating functions; digraphs & graphs, graph
isomorphism & sub-graphs, spanning trees, Euler & Hamiltonian
graphs, planar graphs, chromatic numbers & graph coloring;
groups; Lagrange theorem finite groups; Rings & Fields.
IS F241 Digital Electronics and Microprocesors 3 1 4
Binary logic gates; logic circuits; Boolean algebra and K-map
simplification; number systems and codes; arithmetic logic units;
flipflops; registers and counters; introduction to microprocessors;
architecture; instruction set and programming; memory and I/O
interfacing; examples of system design.
VI
IS F242 Computer Organization 3 1 4
This course covers the fundamentals of computer organization
and architecture. Computer system components; Interconnection
structures; Instruction set architecture; Computer arithmetic;
Memory system; I/O systems; Control unit design; Instruction
execution and scalar pipelining; Parallel processing and Super
scalar pipelining; Introduction to parallel processing architecture
including multi-core systems.
IS F243 Database Systems & Application 3 1 4
Introduction to Database Management Systems; Data Inde-
pendence in databases; DBMS architecture; Data Models; Rela-
tional Model; Query Languages: Relational Algebra and SQL,
Database Design techniques; Normalization; Data Organization;
File Systems and Indexing; Concepts of security and integrity in
databases; Transaction Processing ; Query processing and op-
timization; DBMS based application development; internet appli-
cations XML data management; multimedia databases; Distrib-
uted Databases.
IS F266 Study Project 3
These courses include projects which are oriented towards read-
ings from published literature or books about new frontiers of
development or analysis of available database. These courses
are normally available to students in second or higher levels.
These courses must coterminate with project reports.
IS F301 Principles of Programming Languages 2 0 2
The course covers features of programming languages and in-
troduces the main programming paradigms. It covers, in detail,
the semantics of the features of programming languages –
Control Abstraction, Data Types and Data Abstraction, Scope
and Parameter passing and Concurrency related features. It co-
vers various aspects of runtime environments like global and lo-
cal data, code, function call stacks, dynamically allocated data,
runtime features for exceptions and threads. Introduction to pro-
gramming paradigms. Functional paradigm – formal elements of
lambda calculus, introduction to syntax of common functional
programming languages and programming exercises that ex-
plore the functional paradigm. Logic programming paradigm -
formal elements of logic programming and programming tasks
that explore the logic paradigm. Scripting as a paradigm. Do-
main specific languages. Applications of the principles of pro-
gramming languages –program verification, software testing and
security.
IS F303 Computer Networks 3 1 4
Introduction; Need for Computer Networks; Top-down vs. Bot-
tom-up approaches; Network Services, and Protocols; Network
Reference Models and Architectures, Architecture of the Inter-
net, Types and Applications of contemporary and emerging
Networks, Application-Layer Requirements, Concepts, Services
and Protocols: Protocols for Web, Email, File transfer, Name
Resolution, Address Assignment / Discovery, Remote Access
Services, Voice/Video over IP, Webcasting, Video-Conferencing
and Telepresence, Network Management Protocols and Overlay
Networks; Transport Layer Requirements, Services, Concepts
and Protocols; Network Layer Requirements, Concepts, Ser-
vices and Protocols, Routing vs. Layer-3 Switching; QoS; Link
Layer and Physical Layer Requirements, Concepts, Services
and Protocols, Logical Link and Medium Access Control con-
cepts, Physical medium dependent function, Modes of Signaling
and Communication at the lower layer; IEEE 802 architecture,
Bridging versus Layer-2 Switching; VLANs, VPNs, Performance
vs. Security, Emerging Trends and Best Practices related to de-
sign of computer networks and internetworks.
IS F311 Computer Graphics 3 0 3
Graphics I/O hardware; Generation of dot, lines, conics, curves,
surfaces & polygons; Filling closed regions, 2D & 3D Graphics &
Transformations, Windowing, Viewing & Clipping, Efficient algo-
rithms, Solid Modeling, Color Models & Dithering, Visible surface
detection, Rendering, Animation Techniques, Advanced model-
ing and Future directions.
IS F322 Software Testing 2 1 3
Brief description of importance of software, Life cycle model and
process, Basic software testing, all definitions, Types of testing
and techniques (CFG, CDG etc.), Black Box & white box Testing
I-71
Methodologies, Finite State Machine Model, State based Test-
ing, Static Testing and analysis, Test cases, Test Data Genera-
tion, Test selection, Minimizations and Prioritization, Test ade-
quacy criteria, Software Testing on Web Engineering, Object
based Software Testing, Architecture of Testing tool, Software
Test Effort Estimation, Testing behavior and process model,
Qualitative analysis, Quality factors in software testing, Selection
of testing tools.
IS F341 Software Engineering 3 1 4
Ethics of software Engineering (ACM/IEEE code of Ethics),Type
of Software, Application of Software ,Software Life Cycle Model,
Agile Modeling Requirement Engineering, Object Oriented Anal-
ysis and Design(using UML), Introduction of Web Engineering,
Software Integration and Testing, Support Processes and Soft-
ware Quality, Software change Management, Software Product
and Process Metrics Measurement, Software Project Manage-
ment ,Scheduling ,Staff Measurement, Risk Management, Com-
ponnet based Software Engineering, Quality and Reliability
Model, Maturity Models , Software Reengineering, deployment
models.
IS F342 Compiler Design 2 1 3
Introduction - Compilation and Execution Environments -
Compilers and Interpreters – Requirements and Motivation;
Front-end and Back-end of compilers/interpreters; Intermediate
Representation and Intermediate Languages; Compile Time vs.
Execution Time; Translators, and Assemblers; Virtual Machine -
Just-in-Time Compilers. Structure of a Compiler – Phases and
Passes. In-memory data - intermediate versions of code, symbol
table. Lexical Analysis: Regular expressions and DFA (introduc-
tion where needed), Defining tokens using regular expressions,
Designing and implementing scanners / lexical analyzers.
Parsers: Context Free Languages (introduction where need-
ed)and Recognizing CFLs. Parsing techniques – LL , LR - LR
(0),LR(1), LALR) . Intermediate Representation: Parse Trees
and Abstract Syntax Trees; 3-address code. Semantic Analysis.
Back End Phases: Machine Independent optimizations: Loop
Optimization Techniques - Loop Unrolling, Induction variable
based optimization, Loop-Invariant code elimination. Procedure
Call Optimization, and Dead Code Elimination. Target Code
Generation : Data Flow Analysis, Register Allocation, Instruction
Selection & Scheduling. Memory Management : Memory alloca-
tion support, Memory- de-allocation – Garbage Collection Tech-
niques. Advanced Topics :Issues in compiling Object Oriented
Languages, Functional Languages, Concurrent Languages,
Script & Query Languages.
IS F366 Lab Project 3
IS F367 Lab Project 3
These courses include projects involving laboratory investigation
or laboratory development in the students discipline or interdis-
ciplinary areas. These courses are normally available to stu-
dents in third or higher levels. These courses must coterminate
with project reports.
IS F376 Design Project 3
IS F377 Design Project 3
These courses are intended to impart training in design of prod-
uct/ process or other artifact to the students in the discipline or
interdisciplinary areas. These courses are normally available to
students in third or higher levels. These courses must cotermi-
nate with project reports.
IS F372 Operating Systems 3 0 3
Introduction to operating systems; Various approaches to design
of operating systems ; Overview of hardware support for
0perating systems; Process/thread management: synchroniza-
tion and mutual exclusion, inter process communication, CPU
scheduling approaches ;Memory management: paging, segmen-
tation ,virtual memory, page replacement algorithms ; File sys-
tems: design and implementation of file systems; Input /Output
systems; device controllers and device drivers; Security and pro-
tection ; Case studies on design and implementation of operat-
ing system modules.
IS F462 Network Programming 3 0 3
Overview of computer networks; inter-process communication;
VI
network programming; socket interface; client-server computing
model: design issues, concurrency in server and clients; external
data representation; remote procedure calls; network file sys-
tems; distributed systems design.
IS F491 Special Project 3
This is an unstructured open-ended course where under the
overall supervision of an instructor-in-charge, batches of stu-
dents will be attached to different instructors. Each batch will
work on a specific time-bound project which is of basic or pe-
ripheral concern of his discipline. Each student must submit a
project report as a culmination of his endeavour and investiga-
tion. The instructor- in-charge will determine the choice of the
project and also whether or not the project report is to be submit-
ted jointly by a group or individually by a student. The course will
aim to evaluate student's actual ability to use the fundamentals
of knowledge and to meet new unknown situations as demon-
strated by the students' interaction with the instructors and in-
structor-in- charge and aggregated in the project report. The in-
structor-in- charge may assign specific hours for formal brain-
storming sessions.
Internet Technology & e-Business
ITEB G621 Supply Chain Management 4
Customer driven strategies in production and distribution sys-
tems; Integrated production & distribution networks; SCM in the
context of JIT and MRP-II; Distribution Resource Planning; Man-
agement of dealer networks; Total Quality Control & product in-
novation across the supply chain; Incoming logistics & supplier
relationships; Value addition analysis; Metrics for management
of supply chain performance; Mathematical models and comput-
er assisted decision support for SCM; mathematical program-
ming for SCM.
Japanese
JAP N101T Beginning Japanese 3 0 3
Basic Japanese scripts (Hiragana, Katakana and Kanji);
constructing words using Hiragana and Katakana and
understanding their meanings; forming sentences, un-
derstanding their meanings, learning the related Kanjis;
listening and reading comprehension, conversion prac-
tice, revision and additional practice through audio cas-
settes.
Mathematics
MATH F111 Mathematics I 3 0 3
Functions and graphs; limit and continuity; applications of deriva-
tive and integral. Conics; polar coordinates; convergence of se-
quences and series. Maclaurin and Taylor series. Partial deriva-
tives. Vector calculus in Rn; vector analysis; theorems of Green,
Gauss and Stokes.
MATH F112 Mathematics II 3 0 3
Complex numbers, analytic functions, Cauchy's theorems; ele-
mentary functions; series expansions; calculus of residues and
applications.
Vector space; basis and dimension; linear transformation; range
and kernel of a linear transformation; row reduction method and
its application to linear system of equations.
MATH F113 Probability & Statistics 3 0 3
Probability spaces; conditional probability and independ-
ence;random variables and probability distributions;marginal and
conditional distributions; independent random variables; mathe-
matical expectation; mean and variance; binomial, Poisson and
normal distributions;sum of independent random variables; law
of large numbers; central limit theorem (without proof);sampling
distribution and test for mean using normal and student's t-
distribution; test of hypothesis; correlation and linear regression.
MATH F211 Mathematics III 3 0 3
Eigen-values and eigen-vectors. Inner product space and or-
thonormal bases. Elementary differential equations, Hypergeo-
metric equations, Lengendre polynomials, Bessel functions; Fou-
rier series; Sturm-Liouville problem, series solution for differen-
tial equation, systems of first order equations; Laplace transfor-
I-72
mation and application to differential equations; one dimensional
wave equation, one dimensional heat equation & Laplace equa-
tion in rectangular form.
MATH F212 Optimization 3 0 3
Introduction to optimization; linear programming; simplex meth-
ods; duality and sensitivity analysis; transportation model and its
variants; integer linear programming nonlinear programming;
multi-objective optimization;evolutionary computation tech-
niques.
MATH F213 Discrete Mathematics 3 0 3
Logic and methods of proof, Elementary Combinatorics, recur-
rence relations, Relations and digraphs, orderings, Boolean al-
gebra and Boolean functions.
MATH F214 Elementary Real Analysis 3 0 3
Countability and uncountability of sets; real numbers; limits and
continuity; compactness and connectedness in a metric space;
Riemann integration; uniform convergence.
MATH F215 Algebra I 3 0 3
Groups, subgroups, a counting principle, normal subgroups and
quotient groups, Cayley’s theorem, automprhisms, permutation
groups, and Sylow’s thorems.
Rings, ring of real quaternions, ideals and quotient rings, homor-
phisms, Eculidean rings, polynomial rings, and polynomials over
the rational field.
MATH F231 Number Theory 3 0 3
Primes and factorization; division algorithm; congruences and
modular arithmetic; Chinese remainder theorem Euler phi-
function and primitive roots of unity; Gauss's quadratic reciproci-
ty law; applications to periodic decimals and periodic continued
fractions.
MATH F241 Mathematical Methods 3 0 3
Integral Transforms: Fourier, Fourier sine/cosine and their in-
verse transforms (properties, convolution theorem and applica-
tion to solve differential equation), Discrete Fourier Series, Fast
Fourier transform, Calculus of Variation: Introduction, Variational
problem with functionals containing first order derivatives and
Euler equations, Variational problem with moving boundaries. In-
tegral equations: Classification of integral equations, Voltera
equations, Fredholm equations, Greens functions.
MATH F242 Operations Research 3 0 3
Introduction to Data Processing; Files and File Structures; Index-
ing Techniques; Sorting, Searching and Merging Techniques; In-
troduction to Database Management Systems; Design of Infor-
mation Systems; Emerging trends in Data Processing.
MATH F243 Graphs and Networks 3 0 3
Basic concepts of graphs and digraphs behind electrical com-
munication and other networks behind social, economic and
empirical structures; connectivity, reachability and vulnerability;
trees, tournaments and matroids; planarity; routing and matching
problems; representations; various algorithms; applications.
MATH F244 Measure and Integration 3 0 3
Lebesgue measure and integration in real numbers, Conver-
gence and Convergence theorems, absolutely continuous func-
tions, differentiability and integrability, theory of square integra-
ble functions, and abstract spaces.
MATH F266 Study Project 3
These courses include projects which are oriented towards read-
ings from published literature or books about new frontiers of
development or analysis of available database. These courses
are normally available to students in second or higher levels.
These courses must coterminate with project reports.
MATH F311 Introduction to Topology 3 0 3
Metric Spaces; Topological Spaces – subspaces, Continuity and
homoeomorphism, Quotient spaces and product spaces; sepa-
ration Axioms; Urysohn’s Lemma and Tietze extension Theo-
rem; Connectedness; Compactness, Tychonoff’s Theorem, Lo-
cally Compact Spaces; Homotopy and the fundamental group.
MATH F312 Ordinary Differential Equations 3 0 3
VI
Existence and uniqueness theorems; properties of linear sys-
tems; behaviour of solutions of nth order equations; asymptotic
behaviour of linear systems; stability of linear and weakly nonlin-
ear systems; conditions for boundedness and the number of ze-
ros of the nontrivial solutions of second order equations; stability
by Liapunov's direct method; autonomous and nonautonomous
systems.
MATH F313 Numerical Analysis 3 0 3
Solution of non-linear algebraic equation; interpolation and ap-
proximation; numerical differentiation and quadrature; solution of
ordinary differential equations; systems of linear equations; ma-
trix inversion; eigenvalue and eigenvector problems; round off
and conditioning.
MATH F314 Algebra II 3 0 3
Dual spaces, modules, fields, finite fields, extension of fields: al-
gebraic extension, separable and inseparable extension, normal
extension, sptitting fields, Galois extension, and Galois group.
The algebra of linear transformations, characteristic roots and
characteristic vectors, canonical forms: triangular form, nilpotent
form, and Jordan form.
MATH F315 Introduction to Statistical Inference 3 0 3
Parametric point estimation; Unbiasedness; Consistency; Uni-
form minimum variance unbiased estimator; Method of mo-
ments; Maximum likelihood estimation and its properties; Lower
bounds for the variance of an estimator; Sufficiency; Factoriza-
tion theorem; Best equivariant estimators; Tests of hypotheses;
Neyman-Pearson lemma; uniformly most powerful (UMP) tests;
Likelihood ratio tests; Chi-square tests; Methods for finding con-
fidence intervals.
MATH F316 Matrix Theory and Linear Estimation 3 1 4
Revision of linear algebra and allied concepts; Generalized in-
verse; Singular value decomposition their applications; Majoriza-
tion, Principal components, Canonical correlations; Generalized
inverses, Linear model, Estimability; Residual sum of squares;
Schur complements, Multivariate normal distribution, quadratic
forms and Cochran’s theorem; One-way and two-way classifica-
tions, general linear hypothesis, Multiple correlation and regres-
sion models; Block designs and optimality: reduced form of nor-
mal equations, c-Matrix.
MATH F317 Sampling Theory 3 1 4
Advantages of the sampling method; Principal steps in a sample
survey; Role of sampling theory; Probability sampling; Bias and
its effects. Simple random sample: definitions and notation;
Properties of the estimates; Variances of the estimates; Finite
population correction; Estimation of the standard error from a
sample; Confidence limits; Validity of the normal approximation;
Effect of non-normality on the estimated variance. Sampling for
proportions and percentages. Stratified sampling: Estimation of
gain due to stratification; Ratio and regression methods of esti-
mation; Unbiased ratio type estimators; Optimality of ratio esti-
mate. Cluster sampling, Two stage sampling, Double sampling.
MATH F341 Introduction to Functional Analysis 3 0 3
Banach spaces; fundamental theorems of functional analysis;
Hilbert space; elementary operator theory; spectral theory for
self-adjoint operators.
MATH F342 Differential Geometry 3 0 3
Curve in the plane and 3D-space; Curvature of curves; Surfaces
in 3D-space; First Fundamental form; Curvature of Surfaces;
Gaussian and mean Curvatures; Theorema Egreguim; Geodes-
ics; Gauss-Bonnet Theorem.
MATH F343 Partial Differential Equations 3 0 3
Non linear equations of first order, Charpits Method, Method of
Characteristics; Elliptic, parabolic and hyperbolic partial differen-
tial equations of order 2, maximum principle, Duhamels principle,
Greens function, Laplace transform & fourier transform tech-
nique, solutions satisfying given conditions, partial differential
equations in engineering & science.
MATH F344 Mathematical Fluid Dynamics 3 0 3
Introduction to the Fluid Dynamics and Fundamental Concepts,
Langrange and Eulerian Descriptions, Continuum hypothesis,
I-73
Conservation of Mass based on different approaches, Equation
of Continuity in different Coordinates,Potential Flow, Laplace
Equation, one-,two- and three-dimensional flow, Conservation of
Linear Momentum,Euler’s Equation,Bernoulli’s equation, Consti-
tutive equations for Newtonian Fluid, Navier-Stokes Equations,
First Law of Thermodynamics, Reynolds number, Exact Solution
of Navier-Stocks Equation, Boundary Layer Approximations,
Setting up the Boundary-Layer Equations, Limit Equation For the
Flat Plate, Discussion of Blasius’ Equation, Description of Flow
Past a Circular Cylinder, Decay of a Laminar Shear Layer.
MATH F353 Statistical Inference and Applications 3 0 3
Review of elements of probability and statistical methods, Clas-
sical Decision theory including parametric and non-parametric
methods for testing of hypotheses, Analysis of Variance: One
way and two way classifications, Design of experiments: Analy-
sis of Completely randomized design, Randomized block design
and Latin square design with one or more missing values, Statis-
tical Quality control for variables and measurements.
MATH F354 Complex Analysis 3 0 3
A rigorous treatment of the theory of analytic functions of com-
plex variables including Cauchy's theorems; maximum modulus
theorem; the principles of argument; Jensen's formula; Mittag
Lefler theorem; Weierstrass canonical products and analytic
continuation.
MATH F366 Lab Project 3
MATH F367 Lab Project 3
These courses include projects involving laboratory investigation
or laboratory development in the students discipline or interdis-
ciplinary areas. These courses are normally available to stu-
dents in third or higher levels. These courses must coterminate
with project reports.
MATH F376 Design Project 3
MATH F377 Design Project 3
These courses are intended to impart training in design of prod-
uct/ process or other artifact to the students in the discipline or
interdisciplinary areas. These courses are normally available to
students in third or higher levels. These courses must cotermi-
nate with project reports.
MATH F378 Advanced Probability Theory 3 0 3
Measure theoretic probability and probability space, Law of large
numbers and independence, convergence, Central limit theo-
rems, Higher dimensional limit theorems, Random walks and
their properties, Martingale and their properties, Martingale con-
vergence theorem, Radon-Nikodym derivative, Doob’s inequali-
ty, Backward martingales, Markov chain and their properties, fi-
nite state ergodicity, recurrence and transience.
MATH F420 Mathematical Modeling 3 0 4
Elementary mathematical models; Role of mathematics in prob-
lem solving; Concepts of mathematical modeling; Pitfalls in
modelling; System approach; formulation, Analyses of models;
Sensitivity analysis, Simulation approach. One or more of the in-
terrelated topics will be covered from the following: optimal har-
vesting models, Environmental models, traffic flow models, bio-
fluid flow models, socio-economic models, financial models, sto-
chastic models, etc. providing a fertile ground for interdisciplinary
courses. The selection of topics will depend upon the circum-
stances and mutual interest of the current students and faculty
MATH F421 Combinatorial Mathematics 3 0 3
Advanced theory of permutations and combinations; elementary
counting functions; theory of partitions; theorems on choice in-
cluding Ramsey's theorem; the mobius function; permutation
groups; Polya's theorem and Debrauijn's generalisation; graph-
ical enumeration problems.
MATH F422 Numerical Methodology for Partial Differ-3 1 4
ential Equations
Classification of PDEs, nature of well-posed problems, interpre-
tation of PDEs by characteristics and physical basis, appropriate
boundary/initial conditions. Numerical methods for PDEs: Finite
difference approximations to partial derivatives, Explicit and im-
plicit schemes, Richardson Extrapolation Convergence, Stability
and Consistency of Elliptic, Parabolic and Hyperbolic PDEs. In-
VI
troduction to finite volume method, Computational experiments
based on the algorithms.
MATH F423 Introduction to Algebraic Topology 3 0 3
Homotopy; Fundamental group and Computation; Covering
Spaces; Universal Covering Spaces; Simplicial Complexes;
Simplicial Homology and Computation.
MATH F424 Applied Stochastic Process 3 1 4
Definition and examples of Stochastic Processes (SPs), classifi-
cation of random processes according to state space and pa-
rameter space, types of SPs, elementary problems; Stationary
Process: Weakly stationary and strongly stationary processes,
moving average and autoregressive processes; Martingales:
definition and examples of martingales; Markov Chains: Transi-
tion probability, classification of states and chains, stability of
Markov chains, irreducibility, stationary distribution ergodic theo-
rem; Continuous-time Markov Chains (CTMCs): Poisson pro-
cess, birth-death process and their applications; Continuous time
and continuous state space: Brownian motion, Wiener process
and applications; Renewal processes in discrete and continuous
time; Renewal reward process; Branching Processes; Galton-
Watson branching process and its properties.
MATH F425 Numerical Linear Algebra 3 1 4
Matrix algebra, conditioning, condition number, vector and matrix
norms, perturbation theory of linear systems, stability of numeri-
cal algorithms, Cholesky decomposition, floating point arithmetic
and its error analysis, singular value decomposition (SVD), alge-
braic and geometric properties of SVD, least square solutions,
Moore Penrose inverse, Rank deficient least squares problems,
Sensitivity analysis of SVD and least-squares problems, House-
holder matrices and transformation, QR method, Iterative meth-
ods with iterative refinement, Krylov subspace method, Arnoldi
iteration, Low rank approximations.
Pre-requisite: MATH F112 Mathematics II
MATH F426 Mathematical Theory of Finite Element 3 1 4
Methods
Hilbert spaces, Sobolev Spaces, Variational formulation of ellip-
tic boundary value problems, Lax-Milgram theorem, Error esti-
mates, Construction of FE spaces, Polynomial approximations,
interpolation errors, Aubin-Nitsche duality argument, Parabolic
initial and boundary value problems: Semi-discrete and fully dis-
crete schemes, error estimates.
MATH F427 Statistical Simulation and Data Analysis 3 1 4
Review of probability concepts; Pseudorandom number genera-
tion; Generating discrete random variables – Poisson and bino-
mial random variables; Generating continuous random variables:
Polar method for generating normal random variables; Discrete
event simulation approach – single-server and two-servers
queueing system, inventory model; Statistical analysis of simu-
lated data – bootstrapping technique for estimating mean square
errors; Several ways of variance reduction; Concepts of stratified
sampling; Statistical goodness of fit tests – two sample problem;
Markov chain Monte Carlo methods; The Hastings–Metropolis
algorithm; Gibbs sampler; Continuous time Markov chains and a
queueing loss model; Simulated annealing; Methods of data
analysis.
MATH F428 Time Series Analysis and Forecasting 3 1 4
The course reviews Extrapolative and Decomposition Models,
Introduction to Box–Jenkins Time Series Analysis, ARIMA Mod-
els, which remains the most commonly used statistical technique
in Time Series Analysis. The remainder of the course considers
various practical aspects of the principles behind modern fore-
casting techniques. A one-hour lab will be conducted every
week. Students will learn how to explore and analyze different
types of Time Series data using R programming.
MATH F431 Distribution Theory 3 0 3
C-infinity functions, distributions and their derivatives; support,
convolution and regularization; distributions of finite order; multi-
plication of distributions; Fourier transforms of distributions; tem-
perate distributions and their Fourier transforms; fundamental
solutions.
I-74
MATH F432 Applied Statistical Methods 3 0 3
Review of estimation and testing of hypotheses; Simple and mul-
tiple regression methodology through method of least squares,
Multicollinearity and residual analysis, Categorical data handling
through logistic regression; Multivariate data analysis by Hotel-
ing 𝑇2, Mahalanobis 𝐷2, discriminant analysis, cluster analysis
and factor analysis; Data handling and forecasting time series
data by various components time series methodology; Statistical
Quality Control of variables and attributes control charts; Non
parametric data handling through Kruskal walls test, Mann Whit-
ney and KS two sample test.
MATH F441 Discrete Mathematical Structures 3 0 3
One or more of the interrelated topics will be covered from the
following: graphs, designs, codes, shift register sequences,
groups, fields, Boolean algebras, analysis of algorithms, Fast
Fourier Transform etc. providing a fertile ground for interaction
between mathematics and modern areas of computer science.
The selection of the topics will depend upon the circumstance
and current interest of faculty.
MATH F444 Numerical Solutions of Ordinary Differen-3 0 3
tial Equations
Introduction to ODEs, Numerical Techniques for One Step
Methods, Convergence and Absolute Stability, Numerical tech-
niques for Linear Multi-Step Methods, Zero Stability, Consisten-
cy, Convergence, Predictor-Corrector methods, Absolute Stabil-
ity of Predictor-Corrector methods, Stiff ODEs and its numerical
methods, Finite Difference Methods to Linear and Nonlinear
Boundary Value Problems, Stability and Convergence Analysis,
Differential Algebraic Equations, Numerical techniques for Dif-
ferential Algebraic Equations, Introduction to One dimensional
Finite Element Methods, Comparison between Finite Difference
Methods and Finite Element Methods, Variational formulation,
Finite Element Approximation, Approximation Errors, Conver-
gence of solution, Order of Convergence.
MATH F445 Mathematical Fluid Dynamics 3 0 3
Introduction to the Fluid Dynamics and Fundamental Concepts,
Lagrange and Eulerian Descriptions, Continuum hypothesis,
Conservation of Mass based on different approaches, Equation
of Continuity in different Coordinates, Potential Flow, Laplace
Equation, one-, two- and three-dimensional flow, Conservation
of Linear Momentum, Euler's Equation, Bernoulli's equation,
Constitutive equations for Newtonian Fluid, Navier-Stokes Equa-
tions, First Law of Thermodynamics, Reynolds number, Exact
Solution of Navier-Stokes Equation, Boundary Layer Approxima-
tions, Setting up the Boundary-Layer Equations, Limit Equation
For the Flat Plate, Discussion of Blasius' Equation, Description
of Flow Past a Circular Cylinder , Decay of a Laminar Shear
Layer
MATH F456 Cosmology 3 0 3
History of cosmological ideas, Observational overview of the
universe, Expansion of the universe, Newtonian gravity, Fried-
man equation, the fluid and acceleration equations, Geometry of
the universe, Infinite and observable universe, Big bang, Simple
cosmological models, Hubble law, redshift, Observational pa-
rameters, the cosmological constant, the age of the universe,
weighing the universe, dark matter, CMB, the early universe,
Nucleosynthesis, Inflationary universe, Initial singularity, stand-
ard cosmological model, general relativistic cosmology, classic
cosmology, neutrino cosmology, baryogensis, structure of the
universe.
MATH F471 Nonlinear Optimization 3 0 3
Introduction; convexity and cones; Kuhun Tucker theory; uncon-
strained and constrained optimization; gradient methods; poly-
nomial optimization; penalty function; generalized convex func-
tions; duality in nonlinear programming; optimality criterion for
generalised convex functions; fractional programming.
MATH F481 Commutative Algebra 3 0 3
Modules; direct sums and products; finitely generated modules,
exact sequences; tensor product of modules; rings and modules
of fractions; localization; Noetherian modules and primary de-
compositions; integral dependence and valuation theory; inte-
grally discrete valuation rings and Dedekind domains; fractional
VI
ideals.
MATH F491 Special Projects 3
This is an unstructured open-ended course where under the
overall supervision of an instructor-in-charge, batches of stu-
dents will be attached to different instructors. Each batch will
work on a specific time-bound project which is of basic or pe-
ripheral concern of his discipline. Each student must submit a
project report as a culmination of his endeavour and investiga-
tion. The instructor- in-charge will determine the choice of the
project and also whether or not the project report is to be submit-
ted jointly by a group or individually by a student. The course will
aim to evaluate student's actual ability to use the fundamentals
of knowledge and to meet new unknown situations as demon-
strated by the students' interaction with the instructors and in-
structor-in- charge and aggregated in the project report. The in-
structor-in- charge may assign specific hours for formal brain-
storming sessions.
MATH F492 Wavelet analysis and applications 3 1 4
Haar wavelet bases, Multiresolution analysis, Orthonormal
wavelets from MRA, Orthonormal spline wavelets, Fast wavelet
transforms, Biorthogonal wavelet bases, Compactly supported
wavelets, The Daubechies scaling functions, Coding signals by
wavelet transform, Filter banks, Condition number of a matrix ,
Wavelet Galerkin method.
MATH G511 Design and Analysis of Algorithms 5
Design techniques such as divide-and-conquer, recursion, back-
tracking, branch-and-bound, simulation; Analysis in terms of av-
erage level and worst level efficiency; Relationship to appropri-
ate data structures; Illustrations dealing with problems in com-
puter science, graph theory and mathematics; Computational
complexity and bounds; NP-hard and NP-complete problems.
MATH G512 Selected Topics in Advanced Mathemat-5
ics for Engineering Situations
The topics may include mathematical theory of probability and
stochastic processes, Graph theoretical techniques; information
theory; pattern recognition; fuzzy sets.
MATH G521 Applied Functional Analysis 5
MATH G531 Number Theory 5
MATH G541 Advanced Methods in Discrete 5
Mathematics
Course description for the above courses are to be developed.
MATH G611 Algebraic Number Theory 5
Localization, Galois extensions, Dedekind rings, discrete valua-
tion rings; completion, unramified extensions, ramified exten-
sions; the different and discriminant; cyclotomic fields, roots of
unity, quadratic fields, relations in ideal classes; the unit theo-
rem, Minkowski's constant, Zeta function.
MATH G612 Riemann Surfaces 5
Compact Riemann surfaces, algebraic functions, analytic contin-
uations, branched coverings, study of line bundles, Riemann-
Roch theorem, Serre duality theorem.
MATH G621 Fibre Bundles 5
Differential manifolds, tangent bundle, vector bundles, principal
bundles, functorial properties, the Milnor construction, homotopy
classification, Grassmannians, universal bundles, characteristic
classes, introduction to K-theory.
MATH G622 Algebraic Geometry 5
Study of varieties, introduction to complex varieties, some ideas
on schemes, complete varieties, cohomology of coherent
sheaves.
MATH G632 Lie Groups and Lie Algebras 5
Lie groups: basic definitions, one parameter sub-groups, maxi-
mal tori, representation theory; Lie algebras: basic definitions,
solvable and nilpotent lie algebras, cartan subalgebras, roots
and weights, simple lie algebras, classification theorem universal
enveloping algebras, PBW theorem.
I-75
MATH G642 Complex Manifolds 5
Manifolds and vector bundles: manifolds, vector bundles, & op-
erator & almost complex manifolds; sheaf theory: Sheaf coho-
mology & Cech cohomology; differential geometry: Hermitian dif-
ferential geometry, canonical connection & curvature of Hermiti-
an holomorphic bundles, Chern classes of bundles.
Master of Business Administration
MBA G501 Managerial Economics 3 0 3
The firm and it’s environment, Introduction to basic principles &
methodology, Revenue of the firm, Demand analysis & estima-
tion, Economic forecasting; Production, cost and profit maximi-
zation, Production analysis, Cost of production, Profit analysis of
the firm; Markets and behavior of the firm (Perfect competition,
Monopoly, Monopolistic competition, oligopoly), Factor markets
& profit maximizing employment of variable inputs, Games, in-
formation and strategy, pricing and profit analysis; Sectoral Eco-
nomics.
MBA G502 Business Structure & Processes 3*
Fundamental concepts, development of management theory,
business forms, (proprietorship etc.); review of managerial func-
tions (planning, organizing, staffing, leading and controlling);
business processes, structure and systems, socio-economic in-
terface.
MBA G503 Managerial Skills 2*
The role of manager, team building and goal setting, basics of
supervision, leadership, decision making, negotiation skills and
techniques, how managers communicate, how to interview, pro-
cess of induction, training and development, delegation, how to
appraise employees, how to manage time, use of committees,
how to handle meetings, how to handle complaints.
MBA G504 Legal and Economic Environment of 4*
Business
Indian contracts act, sale of goods act, negotiable instruments
act, companies act, corporate tax laws, consumer protection and
unfair trade practices act, FEMA, Industrial policy, macroeco-
nomic environment, fiscal and monetary policy, overview of Indi-
an economy, economic indicators.
MBA G505 Management Framework & Functions 2 0 2
Overview of management, its role and range of applications,
building blocks and interrelations, core concepts, functional and
strategic areas, quantitative tools and techniques, issues and
approaches to problem solving, developing professional percep-
tions and attitudes.
MBA G506 Negotiation Skills and Techniques 2 0 2
Overview, Negotiation styles, Negotiation process, Tactics in
Negotiation, Handling conflicts in negotiation, Best Alternative to
a Negotiated Agreement, Communication - Key to Effective Ne-
gotiating, Non-verbal communication in Negotiations, Emotions:
dealing with others and ourselves, International negotiations,
Cross Cultural Issues in Negotiations, Power in negotiation,
Workplace Negotiations, Turning Negotiation into a Corporate
Capability, Do’s and Don’ts of Negotiations, Negotiating over the
telephone/ Electronic media, Ethics in negotiation, Negotiation-
Exercise.
MBA G507 International Financial Markets & Services 3 0 3
Currency futures, options and swaps; interest rate determination
and asset pricing in face of volatile nominal and real exchange
rates; international portfolio management; treasury risk man-
agement and performance measurement; major international
stock exchanges: New York; ISE London; Tokyo; trading and
settlement practices; listing of Indian derivatives on Brussles
stock exchange; arranging foreign collaboration; floating India
funds; syndication of Euro-dollar loans.
MBA G508 Functions and Working of Stock 3 0 3
Exchanges
Stock exchanges in India: regulations governing formation and
working; trading and settlement procedures; review of the work-
ing of stock exchanges in India. National stock market system;
OTCEI; listing requirements. requirements for membership of
stock exchange; responsibilities of stock brokers in regard to
VI
contracts and accounts, duties and responsibilities to stock ex-
change, public and members interset; securitiescontracts act,
by-laws and regulations; SEBI guidelines; trading in stock ex-
changes; insider trading: SEBI guidelines; dealings in deben-
tures; rating of debentures; trading in government securities; po-
tential for trading in derivatives.
MBA G509 Investment Banking and Financial Services 3 0 3
Merchant banking function- perspectives; organization of mer-
chant banking function; managing new issues; negotiating terms
with financial institutions, brokers, investors and under writers;
pricing of further issues- SEBI guidelines; syndication of loans
from banks; preparation of loan dossiers and application for fi-
nancial assistance; negotiations; public deposits to finance work-
ing capital; agencies mobilizing public deposits; regulations gov-
erning raising of public deposits; cost of public deposits, factor-
ing, forfeiting , structured finance, securitization and personal fi-
nance like house loan, personal loan and other individual loans,
non-fund based services -credit rating, business advisory ser-
vices, mergers, de-mergers and acquisition, asset management
and insurance commodities services and wealth management.
MBA G510 Human Resource Management 4
Introduction to Human Resource Management, Employment
Laws, The Manager's Role in Strategic Human Resource Man-
agement, Job Analysis, HR Metrics, Human Resource Planning
and Recruiting, Testing and Selection, Interviewing Candidates,
Training and Developing Employees, Performance Management
& Appraisal, Talent Management, Strategic Pay Plans, Pay for
Performance and Employees Relations; Employee Relations &
Employees safety & health; Managing Global Human Resource
& HR in Entrepreneurial Firms; Futuristic trends in HRM; HRM in
Indian Context.
MBA G511 Organisational Behaviour 4
Evolution and relevance; perception emotions and learning in an
organisational set up; attitudes and values, groups and group
processes, leadership, power and politics, organizational
change, resistance and development, managing conflict.
MBA G512 Manufacturing Strategy 4
Corporate strategy; Missing links in manufacturing strategy; Au-
dit approach; Restructuring; Manufacturing strategy process in
practice; Formulation as a process; Operating strategies; Meth-
odology framework; Lean production; Competitive priorities;
Strategic value of response time and product variety; Flexibility
in context of manufacturing strategy; Manufacturing focus; Busi-
ness process reengineering; Theory of constraints; Link between
strategy and organizational culture; Evolution of manufacturing
systems; Operations management strategic perspective.
MBA G513 Quantitative Methods 4
Grouping data, measures of central tendency and dispersion,
probability distribution, sampling and estimation, testing hypoth-
eses, chi-square and analysis of variance, regression and corre-
lation, non-parametric methods, time series and forecasting, in-
dex numbers, decision theory, linear programming, transporta-
tion and assignment problems, queuing theory, network prob-
lems, simulation; application of statistical software (SYSTAT,
SPSS, SIMULA8, etc.) and spreadsheets.
MBA G514 Technology Management 3 0 3
Concept of technology, nature of technological change, econom-
ics of technology, corporate technology strategy, analysis for
technology strategy, adoption and management of new technol-
ogy, accounting for technology, appropriate technologies, trans-
fer of technology, influence of government policies on technolo-
gy, technology, management for sustainable development.
MBA G515 Financial and Management Accounting 4
Basic concepts, double entry accounting, journal, ledger, trial
balance, profit & loss account, balance sheet, cash flow state-
ment, financial statement analysis, ratio analysis, cost-volume-
profit analysis, inventory valuation, inflation accounting, cost ac-
counting and budgetary control systems, financial analysis and
forecasting.
I-76
MBA G516 Corporate Finance and Taxation 4
Role and environment of managerial finance, time value of mon-
ey (NPV, IRR), project feasibility, budgeting, long term invest-
ment decisions, long term financing decisions (LT & ST), capital
structure, dividend decisions, short term financing decisions,
working capital management, principles of corporate taxation,
income tax, capital gains tax, tax laws and provisions, financial
engineering.
MBA G517 Business and Society 4
Corporate social responsibility, business ethics, policies, codes,
standards, ethics and decision making, environmental and social
issues, workplace diversity, fostering ethics at work (whistle
blower policy); business and social etiquette, internet and online
behaviour, etiquette and office electronics.
MBA G518 Marketing 4
Definition, marketing research and forecasting demand, creating
customer value, satisfaction and loyalty, analysing consumer
and business markets, market segmentation, brand equity,
brand positioning, product and pricing strategies, managing ser-
vices, managing value networks and channels, integrated mar-
keting communications, international marketing.
MBA G519 Production and Operations Management 4
Product & service design, plant location, aggregate planning,
capacity, process, layout, sequencing & scheduling, line balanc-
ing, maintenance, quality (control, assurance, management),
statistical quality control, queuing theory, project management.
CPM, PERT.
MBA G520 Business Policy and Strategic 4
Management
Mission, vision, strategic intent, hierarchical levels of strategy,
PEST analysis, SWOT analysis, industry analysis, organisational
analysis, BCG matrix, GE matrix, core competencies, five force
theory, value chain, competitive advantage, generic strategies,
diversification, strategy implementation and control.
MBA G521 Supply Chain Management 4
Purchase/procurement, stores, material handling systems, in-
ventory analysis, inventory models, disposals, make or buy, out-
sourcing; vendor selection, development, and relations; Material
requirements planning, manufacturing resources planning, ERP,
JIT, inbound and outbound logistics, warehousing, transporta-
tion, packaging.
MBA G522 Total Quality Management 4
TQM principles and practices; leadership; customer satisfaction;
employee involvement; continuous process improvement; sup-
plier partnership; performance measures; statistical process con-
trol; ISO 9000; benchmarking; quality function deployment; con-
current engineering; experimental design; Taguchi’s quality en-
gineering; product liability.
MBA G523 Project Management 4
Concepts and techniques of project formulation, evaluation and
implemention; Project planning and scheduling; Risk manage-
ment; Time-cost trade off; Resource leveling and allocation; Pro-
ject monitoring and control; Contract management.
MBA G524 International Business 3 0 3
Global Trade Protection, Cultural Environment, Legal Aspects,
International Monetary System, Overseas Business Options,
MNCs, Regional Analysis, Screening and Segmentation, Inter-
national Marketing Research, International Marketing Strategy,
Export Policy and Institutional Infrastructure, Export Finance,
Export Payments, Exchange Transactions, Product Planning;
Positioning and Management, Distribution Policy; Management
and Agreements, International Pricing and Promotion, Organiz-
ing for Overseas Markets.
MBA G525 R&D Management 3 0 3
Distinctive need and particular structure for management of R&D
systems; the close relationship between R&D objectives and in-
novation and precise time targets; micro considerations like eco-
nomics and cost, science policy, criteria of choice, various is-
sues connected with availability, transfer and marketing of tech-
nology; micro considerations in planning, organisation, project
VI
selection, formulation and management, R&D cost estimating
and budgeting human resources availability, evaluation and
measurement of performance, control problems; mission-
oriented research; technology missions enunciated by Indian
Government.
MBA G526 Database Management Systems 4
Introduction to data bases and management; data files and
structures; hierarchical, relational, network models; distributed
data bases; query processing and query optimization, query lan-
guages; concepts of security and protection; case study of a da-
ta base system.
MBA G527 e-Business and Internet Marketing 4
e-business evolution & opportunities; categories of e-business;
e-business models; network infrastructure & web based tools for
e-business; e-business risks & risks management; network se-
curity and firewall; cryptography and authentication; bill-
ing/payment systems; regulatory environment of e-business;
ERP/SCM/CRM and web based marketing; business intelligence
& intelligent systems; data warehousing and data mining; im-
plementing e-business systems & change management. Case
studies and projects in e-business areas; emerging e-business
scenarios.
MBA G528 Internet Security and Cyber Laws 4
Examination of issues related to network and information securi-
ty, security concepts, security attacks and risks, security archi-
tectures, security policy management, security mechanisms,
cryptography algorithms, security standards, security system in-
teroperation and case studies of the current major security sys-
tems.
MBA G529 Recent Advances in ETM 4
Course description is to be developed.
MBA G530 Project Appraisal 3 0 3
Criteria for selection of a project; factor intensity; commercial
profitability; national economic-profitability; limitations of market
prices; estimation of shadow prices; linkup project appraisal to
national objectives; McGaughey and Thorbeck approach; Little-
Mirrlees method; UNIDO guidelines approach; limitations of the
conventional project appraisal; towards a new framework for pro-
ject appraisal.
MBA G531 Managerial Communication 2*
Business communication basics; issue interpretation, reformula-
tion and summation; interviews, questionnaires and forms;
presentation techniques; technology and communication; busi-
ness correspondence; business documents; group communica-
tion and meetings; employment communication.
MBA G532 Risk Management and Insurance 3 0 3
Introduction to risk; types of risk; risk measurement; risk man-
agement techniques; risk avoidance, loss control, loss financing,
risk retention, risk transfer, internal risk reduction through diver-
sification etc.; insurance business and operations; insurance
pricing; insurance v/s hedging; life, health and income risk;
property and liability risk – commercial and personal; social in-
surance; insurance regulation.
MBA G533 Advertising and Sales Promotion 3 0 3
The communication process and models of persuasive commu-
nication; advertising research; advertising campaign compo-
nents; advertising campaign planning; advertising/media scene;
media concepts; media planning & strategy; advertising cam-
paign planning, execution and evaluation; advertising agencies;
sales promotion types and techniques; sales promotion strategy;
measuring the effectiveness of the promotional program; regula-
tions of advertising and promotion; Extending marketing com-
munication to social communication, personal selling, interna-
tional advertising, interactive advertising, advertising laws, so-
cial, ethical and moral issues.
MBA G534 Introduction to Business Sustainabiligy 3 0 3
Evolution of the Concept of sustainable development, Dimensions
of sustainable development, Issues and Trends in business sus-
tainability, Business Sustainability, Sustainable Consumption and
Production, Industrial Environment Management, Finance of sus-
tainability, Setting Goals and Measuring Progress towards sus-
I-77
tainability
MBA G535 Cross Cultural Management 3 0 3
The Critical Role of Culture in Management, The Various Di-
mensions of Culture, The Impact of Culture On Management
Functions Like Communication, Negotiation, Motivation, Leader-
ship and Human Resource Management, Formulating and Im-
plementing Strategy for International and Global Operations,
Managing Global Teams, International Assignment and Expatri-
ate Management, Skills and Competencies for Global Managers,
International Business Etiquette and Uniqueness of Indian Cul-
ture and Management.
MBA G536 Strategic Financial Management 3 0 3
Company Value and the Manager's Mission: Introduction to Val-
uation, Why Value Value? The Value Manager, Cash Is King
and Value-Based Management. Approach to Valuation - A Prac-
titioner's Guide: Frameworks for Valuation. Valuation Methods:
Discounted, Relative and Contingent Claim. Analyzing Historical
Performance. Forecasting Performance. Estimation of Discount
Rates. Estimation of Cash Flows. Estimation of Growth Rates.
Valuation Models: Dividend-Discount Models, Free-Cash-Flow-
To-Equity Discount Models, Free-Cash-Flow-to-firm Approach,
Price / Earnings Ratio, Price/Book Value Ratio and Price/Sales
Ratio. Measuring and Managing the Company Value: Company
Value vs. Shareholders Wealth Maximization - TSR. Economic
Value Added, Market Value Added and Cash Value Added.
Wealth Creator by the Indian Corporates. Analyzing the Compa-
ny Performance - Application of Balanced Scorecard (BSC). Ap-
plying Valuation: Multibusiness Valuation. Mergers, Acquisition ,
and Joint Ventures.
MBA G537 Security Analysis and Portfolio 3 0 3
Management
Introduction to investment and securities; profile of financial as-
sets; new issue market or primary market, initial public offerings
(IPO); secondary market; framework of risk & return; fundamen-
tal analysis- economy, industry; company analysis; stock evalua-
tion models; multiple holding period and multiple growth rate;
bond analysis and bond management strategies; technical anal-
ysis; efficient market theory; portfolio management; Markowitz
model; Sharpe’s Single Index model; capital asset pricing model;
financial derivatives-options & futures.
MBA G538 Marketing Models 3 0 3
Introduction to Marketing Models, Understanding the consumer
behavior models, Developing models for optimal pricing deci-
sions, Product definitions and classifications, Modeling the ef-
fects of Advertising, media selection and scheduling, Under-
standing Distribution problem, strategy, location, Learning New
Product Planning, Innovation Diffusion process, Understanding
Marketing planning Strategy Decision, Decision and Implemen-
tation.
MBA G539 Six Sigma 3 1 4
Voice of business/customer, Basic concepts of quality manage-
ment, Quality function deployment, Developing Six sigma project
charter, Measurement system analysis, Gauge repeatability and
reproducibility, (R & R), Measuring base line performance, sigma
short term, sigma long-term, sigma goal and entitlement, Validat-
ing the measurement systems, Cause-effect(CE) diagrams,
charts hypothesis testing, Pugh matrix, Design of experiments,
Design of Experiments, Analysis of Variance (ANOVA), Evolu-
tionary Operation (EVOP); Fractional, Full and Orthogonal Ex-
periments, Regression model building, Taguchi methods for ro-
bust design, Six Sigma sustainability, Process capability analy-
sis, Process Capability (Cp), Process Capability Index (Cpk),
Process Performance (Pp), Process Performance Index (Ppk),
Combing the power of lean and six sigma.
MBA G540 Sports Marketing 3 0 3
Understanding scope of sport marketing, Strategic sport market-
ing planning process, Sport consumer decision making process,
Carrying out research in sport, Strategic pricing process in sport,
Facility planning and marketing channels for sporting goods and
services, Understanding market segmentation from viewpoint of
customer and player, Branding and promotion decisions, Tactics
for higher sponsorships, Licensing venue and event marketing,
Advertising strategy in sports, Global sports marketing, and
VI
Public relations in sports.
MBA G541 Operations Strategy 3 0 3
Operations Strategy, Operations Performance, Capacity Strate-
gy, Purchasing and Supply Strategy, Process Technology
Strategy, Improvement Strategy, Product and Service Devel-
opment and Organization, Process of Operations Strategy-
formulation, implementation, Monitoring and Control etc.
MBA G542 Consumer Behaviour 3 0 3
Concepts and characteristics of modern consumer behaviour;
marketers' and consumers' views of consumer behaviour; mar-
ket segmentation of consumers; consumer motivation; personali-
ty, values and involvement; consumers' perception, learning and
attitudes, external influences on consumer behaviour-social, cul-
tural, and situational; influences of sales persons and advertising
on consumer behaviour; consumer decision process.
MBA G543 Leading Modern Organizations 3 0 3
Evolving role of management in organizations and functional ar-
eas, Importance of leadership in modern day organizations, Var-
ious models and theories of leadership, Understanding leader-
ship from four perspectives : Self-assessment of Individual
Leadership through models of personal growth and effective-
ness; Team Leadership: importance of motivation, building trust,
managing crisis and communicating effectively for creating high
performing teams: Organizational Leadership: Inspiring innova-
tion and change, enabling changes effectively, ethical leadership
and; understanding the situational factors of effective leadership
in the Global Context, Ethical Leadership.
MBA G544 Organizational Theory & Behaviour 3 0 3
Organizational Behaviour; Diversity in Organizations, Attitude
and Job Satisfaction, Emotions and Moods, Personality & Val-
ues, Perception and individual Decision Making, Basic Motiva-
tion: Concepts & Applications, Foundations of group behavior &
Understanding work teams, Organizational communication,
Transactional analysis and Managerial Interpersonal Relations,
Power and politics, Conflict management.
Organizational Structure, Organizational Design, Organizational
culture, Organizational change, Positive organizational behavior,
Ethics in organization.
MBA G545 Management Science 3 0 3
Management Science Approach to Problem Solving, Model
Formulation and Graphical Solution, Computer Solution and
Sensitivity Analysis, Modelling and Applications, The Simplex
Method, Transportation Problem and its variants; Assignment
Problem and its variants, Integer Programming and its Location;
Goal Programming (GP); Loading and Machine scheduling; Dis-
tribution Problems; Waiting Lines and Queuing Theory Models,
Simulation Modeling; Applications in Workforce Planning, Mar-
keting, Investment, Healthcare Systems, Education and other
business cases and applications.
MBA G546 Business Statistics 3 0 3
Randomness and Probability; Random Variables and Probability
Models; Theoretical Probability Distributions; Sampling and
Sampling Distributions; Estimation; Testing of Hypothesis in
Case of Large and Small Samples; Chi – Square Test; F – Dis-
tribution and Analysis of Variance (ANOVA); Regression Analy-
sis; Time Series Analysis; Index Numbers, Business Case Prob-
lems and applications.
MBA G547 Accounting for Managers 3 0 3
Basics of accounting concepts and practices, collecting, record-
ing and reporting accounting information: journal entries, ledger
and trial balance, preparation of final accounts, financial state-
ment analysis — ratio analysis, Indian Accounting Standards,
taxation – direct, indirect and GST etc. and their implications on
financial reporting, management accounting tools and tech-
niques: introduction to cost concepts, understanding the nature
and importance of various cost components, introduction to vari-
ous control systems in an organization: preparation & analysis of
budget as a tool for management control system, preparation of
cost sheet and standard costing. Ethical Issues in Corporate
governance.
I-78
MBA G548 Strategic Marketing 3 0 3
Viewing marketing as a value creation process, Using a frame-
work to analyze market opportunities Analysis, Situational Anal-
ysis, Understanding the buying-decision process of consumers,
Selecting the target market and positioning the product, Devel-
oping an integrated marketing program, Designing products and
services that deliver meaningful customer value, Using the
"augmented" product as an antidote to commoditization , Captur-
ing created value for the firm, Shifting from cost-based to value-
based pricing, Planning the budget and media mix for marketing
communications, Designing and managing the distribution chan-
nel, Positioning the internet as an effective online sales tool, Re-
defining strategy for the digital world, Understanding how digital
and social media marketing contribute to a sustainable business
strategy, Creating a strategic marketing plan, Anticipating and
adapting to change, Ethical issues in marketing.
MBA G549 Introduction to Systems & Sustainability 3 0 3
Introduction to system, Open and closed system, Socio-
ecological system, Systems for Sustainability, Sustainable de-
velopment – evolution, approaches, interpretations, Climate
change – Law policy & opportunities, Business (corporate) sus-
tainability, triple bottom line, CSR, Social Accounting, Social In-
vestment, Impact Assessment, Sustainability and Profitability,
Sustainable production and consumption, zero emission in in-
dustries, Sustainability benchmarking and indicators, Sustaina-
bility reporting.
MBA G550 Critical and Design Thinking 3 0 3
Learning about thinking, deductive, inductive and abductive
thinking, Convergent and Divergent thinking, Lateral thinking,
Adverbial thinking, Parallel thinking; Creativity and Innovation,
Problem definition, Theory of Constraints, 5 Why’s method, Prin-
ciples of Design Thinking, enabling design thinking in teams, ap-
plication of design thinking; Systems principle, Holistic thinking,
Learning Organization, Integrative thinking.
MBA G551 Internetworking Technologies 3 0 3
Introduction to internetworking concepts; the internet architec-
ture; goals and key issues related to internetworking technolo-
gies; design aspects; HTTP and other relevant protocols; agent
technology and tools relevant to the internet; techniques of data
compression; voice, video, and interactive video-on-demand
over the internet; multimedia operating systems and their impact;
multimedia networking; mobile computing; internet security; case
studies.
MBA G552 Total Productive Maintenance 4
Outline of TPM; TPM – Challenging limits; Maximizing equip-
ment effectiveness; Organizing for TPM implementation; TPM
implementation and stabilization; TPM small group activities; the
PM prize for outstanding TPM plants.
MBA G553 Organizational Change and Development 3 0 3
Business Organisation: The Domain of Change; Concept of
Change; Perspectives on Organizational Change; Models of
Change; Organizational Resistance to Change; Organizational
Change and Change Agents; Strategic Management of Change;
Organizational Diagnosis; Organizational Development (OD);
Organizational Transformation (OT); Role of Change Agents and
Leadership; Manager as Catalyst of Change; Implementing Or-
ganizational Change; Organizational Culture and Change;
Learning Organization: The Ultimate Objective of Change Man-
agement.
MBA G554 Innovative Leadership 3 0 3
Leadership for innovation, Stimulating Bottom-Up innovation,
Steering innovation Top-down, Appointing an Innovation Con-
ductor, Leadership Imperative for Innovation Strategy, Leading
development of new products, Leading the creation of totally
new product/service, Innovation leaders as pragmatic architect,
Leading improved customer solutions, Building an innovative
leadership environment, Attracting, developing and keeping In-
novative Leaders.
VI
MBA G555 International Human Resource Manage-3 0 3
ment
Enduring context of International Human Resource Management
(IHRM), Context of Cross-border Alliances and SMEs, Staffing
International Operations for Sustained Global Growth, Recruiting
and Selecting Staff for International Assignments, International
Training and Development, International Compensation, Re-
entry and Career Issues (Expatriation Issues), IHRM in the Host
Country Context, International Industrial Relations ,Performance
Management, IHRM Trends: Complexity, Challenges and
Choices in the Future.
MBA G556 Performance Management 3 0 3
Overview of Performance Appraisal & Management, Perfor-
mance Management in the Organizational Context, systems &
processes ; Goal Setting, Approaches to Performance Appraisal,
Performance Appraisal Techniques, Data Gathering, Observing,
and Documenting, The Performance Appraisal Meeting, Feed-
back, Performance Diagnosis and Improvement, Linkage to Re-
wards & Compensation, Training & Development Requirements,
Potential Appraisal & Career Progression, issues: Problems,
Role of HR, Training the appraisers, Performance Appraisal in
India.
MBA G557 Economic Environment of Business 3 0 3
Introduction to Business Environment, Role of Government in
policy formulation, Mercantile laws: Indian Contract Act 1872,
Indian Sales of Goods Act 1930, Macro Economic Concepts:
Consumption, Savings, Investment, Economic Growth, Industrial
policy, Introduction to the financial markets, Money supply and
Banking system, National Income, Implications of Fiscal policy
and Monetary policy for Business.
MBA G558 Operations and Supply Chain Management 3 0 3
Strategic importance of Operations, Forecasting, Product plan-
ning, Management of Quality, Statistical Process Control, Pro-
cess Strategy, Layout planning, Production Scheduling, Invento-
ry Management, MRP, Supply chain Management: An Overview,
Supply chain strategy, Supply chain performance measurement,
Distribution networks, Order management and customer service,
Sales and Operations Planning, Transportation, Digital Supply
chain, IoT and Blockchain, Sustainability in Supply chain, Ethical
supply chain.
MBA G559 Corporate Finance 3 0 3
Basics of financial management, time value of money, valuation
of securities, risk return and opportunity cost of capital, capital
budgeting, WACC and company valuation, capital financing de-
cisions – capital structure, working capital management, divi-
dend decisions, Aspects of Mergers & Acquisitions, Risk Man-
agement, International Financing. Ethical versus legal standards
in finance, Limited Liability, its Effects and Legal Responses, In-
sider Dealing and Market Abuse, Regulatory Competition and
Regulatory Arbitrage.
MBA G560 Marketing Research & Metrics 3 0 3
Elements of marketing research process viz. Problem Definition,
Development of an approach to the Problem, Research Design
formulation, Exploratory, Descriptive and experimental, Field-
work & Data collection, Data preparation & Analysis, univariate,
bivariate and multivariate statistical techniques, Report prepara-
tion and Presentation. Marketing metrics. Nonfinancial metrics:
Brand awareness, Test drive, Churn, Customer satisfaction
(CSAT) and Take rate; Financial metrics: Profit, Net present val-
ue (NPV), Internal rate of return (IRR), Payback, Customer life-
time value (CLTV), Cost per click (CPC), Transaction conversion
rate (TCR), Return on ad dollars spent (ROA), Bounce Rate and
Word of mouth (WOM).
MBA G561 Business Analytics 3 0 3
Decision Making using Business Analytics; Business Analytics in
Practice; Advanced Data Visualization; Data Dashboards, Pre-
dictive and Prescriptive Spreadsheet Models; Cluster Analysis;
Text Mining; Logistic Regression; k-Nearest Neighbors; Classifi-
cation and Regression Trees; Building Good Spreadsheet Mod-
els: What-If Analysis; Auditing Spreadsheet Models; Risk Analy-
sis; Simulation Modelling; Application of optimization models:
Capital Budgeting; Bank Location; Product Design and Market
Share Optimization; A Location Problem; Markowitz Portfolio
I-79
Model; Forecasting Adoption of a New Product; Big Data: Statis-
tical Inference and Practical Significance; Case Problems, Data
Governance & Ethics.
MBA G562 Services Marketing 3 0 3
Distinctive elements, system: relationships with customers; posi-
tioning; managing customer portfolio, demand management,
service delivery process, pricing; promotion; operating strategy;
quality, productivity, human resource management; internation-
alization of services; services marketing in future.
MBA G563 Industrial Marketing 3 0 3
Market/consumer orientation, marketing in industrial context, in-
dustrial market behaviour, organisational buying and buying be-
haviour, business forecasting and planning, product planning,
new product development, pricing, distribution, management of
communications, advertising & personal selling, management of
sales force, corporate strategy and industrial marketing.
MBA G564 Decision Making 3 0 3
Decision Analysis, Decisions under certainty and under uncer-
tainty, Behavioral Decision Making, Framing of Decisions and
Psychology of Choice, Common Errors, Paradoxes, Anomalies
and Traps, Game theory- simple, two - player and bi- matrix
games, Concepts of dominance, equilibrium and iterated domi-
nance, Negotiation Analysis, Joint and Collaborative Decisions.
MBA G565 Information & Knowledge Management 3 0 3
Systems
Information systems, organization and strategy; Ethical and so-
cial issues in information systems; IT infrastructure, emerging
technologies, tools and portals for information and knowledge
management; Creating, accumulating and applying knowledge in
a learning organization; Building information systems in a learn-
ing organization; Information and knowledge management sys-
tems in digital economy; Managing projects; Future of infor-
mation and knowledge management systems in the modern era
of business.
MBA G566 Strategic Management 3 0 3
Overview of strategy, Crafting Strategy, company’s strategy and
its business model; Environmental Scanning, General Environ-
ment, Task Environment, STEEP analysis, Industry analysis;
Resource based view of firm, Core competence, Distinctive
competence, Competitive Advantage, Sustainable competitive
advantage, Value Chain analysis; Strategy Formulation; Corpo-
rate strategy, business strategy, functional strategy; Strategy
Implementation; Strategy Evaluation; Advanced Topics of stra-
tegic management: Blue Ocean Strategy, Ethical Issues and
conduct.
MBA G567 Technology Innovation & Entrepreneurship 3 0 3
Technology & Innovation; Role of technology & entrepreneurship
in addressing societal needs/problems, creation of economic ac-
tivities and wealth; Understanding Technology innovation cycle;
Timing factor; Technology-price relationship; Understanding of
technology life cycle; Technology planning & Roadmap; Types of
innovation; Disruptive innovation and innovation for base of the
pyramid; Process and key elements of entrepreneurship: Entre-
preneurial opportunity recognition and feasibility analysis; De-
veloping B-Plan; innovating Business Model, Legal Aspects and
financing.
MBA G568 International Business Strategy & Opera- 3 0 3
tions
Introduction to International Business, International Market, Cul-
tural environment, Legal, political, economic and monetary as-
pects facing IB, Governments influence on trade via policies and
instruments, Trade theory, Global Trade Protection and the Insti-
tutional Background, Global foreign exchange markets, trading
process and benefits to IB, Determination of exchange rates,
forex arrangements, role of IMF, forecasting and IB benefits, IB
Strategy for sustainable value creation and profitability, Multina-
tional corporation, Types of global strategies: integration & re-
sponsiveness, Export and import strategies: global & Indian con-
text, Export - Import Procedures, Country evaluation and selec-
tion, Marketing globally & use of digital technologies, Global
supply chain management, theory of FDI, Multinational Finance
function, India specific analysis: Export Incentives, assistance,
VI
ECGC, export finance, role of banks and other institutions,
Emerging market enterprise strategies.
MBA G571 Management Information Systems 3 0 3
Introduction to Information Systems; Concepts of management,
concepts of information, systems concepts; Information Systems
and Organizations; decision making process; database sys-
tems; data communications; planning, designing, developing and
implementing information systems; quality assurance and evalu-
ation of information systems; future developments and their or-
ganizational and social implications; decision support system
and expert systems.
MBA G574 Retail Management Systems 3 0 3
Retailing history and theories, basic retail management process,
retail industry in Indian and abroad, shopper behavior in retail-
ing, retailing formats and location related issues, category man-
agement, supply chain management in retail, retail buying, store
layout and design, point of purchase communication, retail pric-
ing strategy, building store loyalty and technology in retailing.
Case studies and projects in retailing, specially focusing on Indi-
an scenarios.
MBA G575 Financial Engineering 3 0 3
Introduction; Review of Markets, Players, and Conventions;
Cash Flow Engineering with Forward Contracts; Engineering
Simple Interest Rate Derivatives; Swap Engineering; Report
Market Strategies; Dynamic Replication Methods and Synthet-
ics; Mechanics of Options; Options Engineering with Applica-
tions; Pricing Tools; Applications of Fundamental Theorem of Fi-
nance; Fixed Income Engineering; Tools for Volatility Engineer-
ing: Volatility Swaps and Volatility Trading; Engineering of Equity
Instruments: Pricing and Replication, computational methods
such as Monte Carlo Simulation.
MBA G576 Digital Marketing 3 0 3
Fundamentals of e-Business and Internet Marketing, e-Business
Models and Frameworks, Digital Marketing Strategy, Online
Public Relations, Search Engine Optimization and Marketing,
Content Marketing, E-Mail Marketing, Social Media Marketing,
Mobile Marketing, Optimizing Customer and User Experience,
Web Analytics.
MBA G577 Supply Chain Analytics 3 1 4
Introduction to supply chain analytics, Data understanding and
data preparation, Supply chain performance , Descriptive analyt-
ics, Predictive analytics and setting up the problem, Supply
chain forecasting, studying holt, winter and ARIMA models,
Supply chain Network Planning, Multi echelon network optimiza-
tion, Supply chain sales and operations planning, Supply chain
segmentation, Vehicle routing problems, Supervised and Unsu-
pervised learning, Use of Bayesian networks in supply chain,
Simulation and SC models, Supply chain risk management.
MBA G578 Game Theory and Business Strategy 3 0 3
Psychology and philosophy of games of strategy; Non-
cooperative, One-time, Static Games with Complete Information;
Finitely, Infinitely Repeated, Static Games with Complete Infor-
mation; Mixed Pure Strategies; Games with imperfect competi-
tion; Games with perfect competition and monopoly; Strategic
Trade Policy; Dynamic Games with Complete and Perfect Infor-
mation; Bargaining; Pure Strategies with Uncertain Payoffs; Auc-
tions.
MBA G579 Management Practice 3*
This course is intended to make student explore a business
problem and offer insights for the solution using management
frameworks, tools & methodology under the guidance of faculty
member(s). This may include research work. The student will
submit the report after completion.
MBA G581 Expert Systems 4
The object of this course is to study in details the features of ex-
pert systems and their role in the scientific world of today and
tomorrow. It concentrates on the tools available to the
knowledge engineer, expert systems, building techniques, and
the difficulties which may be encountered during the develop-
ment of an expert system.
I-80
MBA G582 Creating & Leading Entrepreneurial Or-3 0 3
ganizations
Fundamentals of entrepreneurship; elements of leadership; iden-
tifying business opportunities; market study and research; busi-
ness plans; finance, issues in raising finance; venture capitalist
evaluation of business plans, technical aspects for the project,
corporate strategies for growth; legal aspect to entrepreneurship,
people skills, marketing and branding; creativity and communica-
tion.
MBA G583 Marketing Research 3 0 3
An examination of the concepts and practical methodology used
in marketing research. An overview of marketing research pro-
cess, with emphasis on research design; data instrument design;
questionnaire formulation; sampling plans; data collection meth-
ods -interviewing, panels; data analysis and use of computer
based information systems for marketing intelligence. Also Time-
series & Regression based models of sales forecasting, control
and evaluation of marketing function and survey methodology
are covered.
Emphasis will be on cases and research projects.
MBA G586 Product and Brand Management 3 0 3
Scope of product Policy Decisions; Product-Market strategy;
Product Life Cycle and Strategy; Managing Product Deletion;
Product Associations; Branding including aspects of brand name
selection; Brand Equity and its utilization for marketing decision
making; Brand Extension: use for brand names for launching
new products; New product development process; Idea Genera-
tion and Screening; Concept Development and Evaluation;
Product Design and Testing; Market planning; Testing the mar-
ket plan; Marketing research process; Adoption and Diffusion of
products; Organizing for new and existing product.
MBA G588 Services Management System 3 0 3
Understanding Services, the Service Sector today, Designing
the Service Enterprise, Technological Issues, Structuring Ser-
vice Operations, Processes Management, Staffing for Services,
Functions of Services Management System, Client Relation-
ships, Measuring and Reporting Services.
MBA G589 Enterprise Resource Planning 3 0 3
Introduction to ERP; Re-engineering and ERP systems; ERP
planning, design, and implementation; ERP systems – sales and
marketing; ERP systems – accounting and finance; ERP sys-
tems – production and materials management; ERP systems –
human resources; Managing and ERP project; Supply chain
management and e-Market place.
MBA G593 Business Analysis and Valuation 3 0 3
Theory of finance, value maximization, stakeholder theory, and
corporate objective function: value creation – ways and means,
business analysis: The techniques of strategy and competitive
analysis, value chain analysis for competitive advantages, busi-
ness valuation – approaches and methods, the dark side of val-
uation: strategic investment decisions.
MBA G622 Software Project Management 4
Managing a software development project, concepts, objects of
a project, environment of a software project, system develop-
ment life cycle, tools, review process; documention in software
program management, procedures, diagramming techniques,
management; Planning and monitoring a software project, pro-
ject planning, management tools, software project definitions,
project management packages, project control; software project
definition, classification, project sizes and methodologies, feasi-
bility, requirements and start-up; programmer productivity; soft-
ware planning, control tools, accelerated design; prototyping and
role in software project management; software production and
software project management; software system installation,
managing testing requirements, test plans, alpha and beta sys-
tems; emerging directions in project management.
MBA in Business Analytics
MPBA G501 Managerial Economics 3 0 3
The firm and it’s environment, Introduction to basic principles &
methodology, Revenue of the firm, Demand analysis & estima-
tion, Economic forecasting; Production, cost and profit maximi-
VI
zation, Production analysis, Cost of production, Profit analysis of
the firm; Markets and behavior of the firm (Perfect competition,
Monopoly, Monopolistic competition, oligopoly), Factor markets
& profit maximizing employment of variable inputs, Games, in-
formation and strategy, pricing and profit analysis; Sectoral Eco-
nomics.
Equivalent: MBA G501
MPBA G502 Financial Statement Analysis & Reporting 3*
Financial Statement Analysis and reporting depicts the financial
health of any company and helps the companies to augment
their financial resources and management of generated funds ef-
ficiently. The course provides an overview of the preparation of
financial statements and understanding, financial analysis of
statements, and the significance of financial reporting.
MPBA G503 Marketing Management 3 0 3
Definition, marketing research and forecasting demand, creating
customer value, satisfaction and loyalty, analysing consumer
and business markets, market segmentation, brand equity,
brand positioning, product and pricing strategies, managing
services, managing value networks and channels, inte-
grated marketing communications, international marketing.
MPBA G504 Managing People & Organization 3 0 3
Fundamental concepts and principles of management as
applied to a variety of organizations; elementary study of
managerial roles, styles, activities and decision making;
relationship with organizational effectiveness; basic concepts re-
lating to planning activities, manpower development; basic con-
cepts relating to organizational behaviour.
MPBA G505 Statistics & Basic Econometrics 3*
Probability and Probability Distributions, Characteristics of Prob-
ability Distributions, Some Important Probability Distributions,
statistical inference, estimation and hypothesis testing; ANOVA,
MANOVA, MANCOVA, the linear regression model (two-variable
model, multiple regression, functional forms, dummy variables);
regression analysis in practice (model selection criteria and tests,
multicollinearity, heteroskedasticity, autocorrelation), simulta-
neous-equations models. Statistical package 'R' will be used in
this course.
MPBA G506 Data Management and Warehousing 3*
The database environment and the development process, Mod-
elling data in organizations, Entity-Relationship diagrams, logical
database design, and relational model, physical database design
and performance, Structured Query Language (SQL), Database
application architectures, Foundations of Data warehousing, Da-
ta quality and integration, Big Data analytics, Data, and data-
base administration.
MPBA G507 Programming for Analytics 3*
Variables & data types, operators, conditional statements, itera-
tion statements, functions, Objects, and classes for Python;
Data structures – vectors, matrices, lists, tuples, dictionaries, da-
ta frames, Packages: using existing packages and creating new
packages, Data loading: from CSV, MS Excel, JSON & SQL da-
tabases Data wrangling: describing, summarizing, manipulating,
and handling missing values of data in data frames; perform an
operation such as delete values, find unique values, drop dupli-
cate values, grouping, and performing loop operations over col-
umns or rows; merging data frames; handling categorical data;
handling time-series data, handling text data, web scraping, and
handling images. Basics of version control using Github. Primary
languages are R and Python.
MPBA G508 Strategic Management 3 0 3
Overview of strategy, Crafting Strategy, company’s strategy and
its business model; Environmental Scanning, General Environ-
ment, Task Environment, STEEP analysis, Industry analysis;
Resource based view of firm, Core competence, Distinctive
competence, Competitive Advantage, Sustainable competitive
advantage, Value Chain analysis; Strategy Formulation; Corpo-
rate strategy, business strategy, functional strategy; Strategy
Implementation; Strategy Evaluation; Advanced Topics of stra-
tegic management: Blue Ocean Strategy, Ethical Issues and
conduct.
Equvalent: MBA G566
I-81
MPBA G509 Corporate Finance 3*
Basics of financial management, time value of money, valuation
of securities, risk return and opportunity cost of capital, capital
budgeting, WACC and company valuation, capital financing de-
cisions – capital structure, working capital management, divi-
dend decisions, Aspects of Mergers & Acquisitions, Risk Man-
agement, International Financing. Ethical versus legal standards
in finance, Limited Liability, its Effects and Legal Responses, In-
sider Dealing and Market Abuse, Regulatory Competition and
Regulatory Arbitrage.
Equvalent: MBA G559
MPBA G510 Operations & Supply Chain Management 3*
Strategic importance of Operations, Forecasting, Product plan-
ning, Management of Quality, Statistical Process Control, Pro-
cess Strategy, Layout planning, Production Scheduling, Invento-
ry Management, MRP, Supply chain Management: An Overview,
Supply chain strategy, Supply chain performance measurement,
Distribution networks, Order management and customer service,
Sales and Operations Planning, Transportation, Digital Supply
chain, IoT and Blockchain, Sustainability in Supply chain, Ethical
supply chain.
Equvalent: MBA G558
MPBA G511 Data Visualization, Ethics and Data
3*
Privacy
Data Visualization Tools:R, Rstudio; RMarkdown; Organising da-
ta for visualization; choosing right visualization; visualization in
practice: continuous variables, categorical variables, time-
varying variables, visualizing statistical summaries, spatial data
with maps, dimension reduction, three dimensions, networks,
and interactive visualizations. Primary packages for visualiza-
tion: ggplot2 & shiny. Secondary packages: Matplotlib, and
Plotly. Introduction to Ethics, Intellectual Property, Information
Privacy, Privacy, and the Government, Computer and Network
Security, Professional Ethics.
MPBA G512 Time Series Analysis and Forecasting 3*
Extrapolative and Decomposition Models, Introduction to Box–
Jenkins Time Series Analysis, ARIMA Models, Estimation and
Diagnosis, Metadiagnosis and Forecasting, Intervention Analy-
sis, Autoregressive Error Models-The Nature of Serial Correla-
tion of Error, Sources of Autoregressive Error, Autoregressive
Models with Serially Correlated Errors, Tests for Serial Correla-
tion of Error, Corrective Algorithms for Regression Models with
Autocorrelated Error, Forecasting with Autocorrelated Error
Models, Models with Stochastic Variance- ARCH and GARCH
Models, A Review of Model and Forecast Evaluation. The
course necessarily involves the use of statistical software and
programming languages.
MPBA G513 Predictive Analytics 3*
An Introduction Predictive Analytics, Exploratory Data Analysis,
Dimension-Reduction Methods, Preparing the Data for modeling,
Decision Trees, Support Vector Machines, Regression Analysis
Techniques, Naïve Bayes and Bayesian Networks, Clustering,
Association Rules, Boosting and Begging algorithms, Enhancing
Model Performance. The course necessarily involves the use of
statistical software and programming languages.
MPBA G514 Deep Learning for Business 3*
Introduction to deep learning, and example applications of deep
learning algorithms to solve business problems; Basics of neural
networks; Applying linear regression and logistic regression us-
ing neural networks; Deep neural networks: concepts and
hands-on applications; Model Building & Hyper- parameters tun-
ing, Convolution Neural Networks (CNN), Recurrent Neural Net-
works, Deep reinforcement learning; Long Short Term Memory
(LSTM); Generative Adversarial Networks (GANs); Challenges &
limitations of deep learning algorithms
MPBA G515 Prescriptive Analytics with Math-
3*
ematical Programming
Linear Programming, Duality Theory, Sensitivity Analysis, Net-
work Models, Integer Programs, Stochastic Optimization, Se-
quential Decision Making, Non-Linear and multi-Objective Opti-
mization, Local Search and Meta-heuristics, Large-Scale Opti-
mization, Monte Carlo simulation. The course necessarily in-
VI
volves the use of statistical software and programming lan-
guages.
MPBA G516 Advanced Spreadsheet & Macro Pro-
3*
gramming for Business
Variables, Arrays, Constants, and Data Types, Modules, Func-
tions, and Subroutines, Programming Basics, The Excel Object
Model, Using Excel to Interact with Other Office Programs,
Working with Databases, API Calls, Class Modules, Animation,
Converting Labels to Numbers and Numbers to Labels, Trans-
posing a Range of Cells, Adding Formula Details into Com-
ments, Replacing Characters in a String, Auto Totaling a Matrix
of Numbers, Coloring Alternate Rows and Columns of the
Spreadsheet, Globally Changing a Range of Values, Searching
Multiple Sheets and Workbooks, Brighten Up Your Comments,
An Alternative to Message Boxes, Working with Shapes, Turning
Your VBA Code into an Add-In.
MPBA G517 Big Data Analytics 3*
Hardware trends for data storage and computation, Big data in
private and government sectors, Evolution of tools to handle big
data, Apache Spark: for big data processing & engineering,
Spark's Resilient Distributed Datasets (RDDs), Transformations
and actions in Spark, Exploring big datasets using spark, Appli-
cation of machine learning algorithms on big datasets through
Spark, Application of deep learning algorithms on big datasets
through Spark, Handling huge textual datasets and application
of deep learning algorithms through Spark, Challenges.
MPBA G518 Bayesian Analysis 3*
Distributions; likelihoods, priors; intuition of building Bayesian
models; Basics of Markov Similatuions, building posterior distri-
butions from MCMC simulations; single-parameter models, Mul-
ti-parameter models, Hierarchical Models; Generalised Linear
Models, Model checking and comparison of models. The course
necessarily involves the use of statistical software and pro-
gramming languages.
MPBA G519 Natural Language Processing for
3*
Business
Natural language processing and its neighbors, Themes in Natu-
ral language processing, Types of textual data, Preparing textual
data for analysis, Regular expressions and patterns matching,
term frequency times inverse document frequency, Word to vec-
tor representations (word embeddings), and feature engineering,
Text classification or Topic Modeling, Text to knowledge conver-
sion: Knowledge graph construction, N- grams, and analysis of
word networks in text, logical semantics, predicate argument
semantics.
MPBA G520 Analytics for Supply Chain 3*
Supply chain performance, Descriptive analytics, Supply chain
forecasting, studying holt, winter and ARIMA models, Supply
chain segmentation. Single period and multi-period inventory
modeling, Multi-echelon inventory models, Network flow models,
Distribution planning, Sales, & Operations planning, Vehicle
routing problems, Simulation in supply chain risk assessment.
MPBA G521 Supply Chain Finance 3*
Financial flexibility, Supply chain, and finance link, SCOR model,
Financial measures, Trade finance tools, operational hedging,
enterprise risk management (ERM), supply chain risk manage-
ment (SCRM), integrated risk management (IRM), supply chain
finance (SCF), and financial management of supply chain strat-
egies.
MPBA G522 Discrete Event Simulation 3*
Introduction to Simulation, Simulation Examples, General Princi-
ples, Simulation Software, Statistical Models in Simulation,
Queueing Models, Random-Number Generation, Input Modeling,
Verification and Validation of Simulation Models, Output Analysis
for a Single Model, Some Simulation Applications.
MPBA G523 IT Project Management 3*
Project lifecycle, Scope of work, scope statement, scope creep,
project planning, work breakdown structure, project network
method, CPM, PERT, project cost estimation, function method,
cocomo model, project crashing, project scheduling, time-
phased budgeting, project monitoring and control, earned value
I-82
method, agile project management.
MPBA G524 Marketing Analytics 3*
Introduction to marketing analytics, Pricing of Single and Bun-
dled Products, Forecasting (Bass Diffusion Model, Copernican
Principle), Demand Analysis (Conjoint Analysis, Logistic Re-
gression, Discrete Choice Analysis), Seasonality, Neural Net-
works to Predict Sales, Customer Life-time Value, Allocation of
Marketing Resources, Market Segmentation (Cluster Analysis,
Collaborative Filtering, Classification Tree), Market Basket Anal-
ysis, Optimizing Direct Mail Campaigns, Allocating Retail Space
and Sales Resource, Measuring Effectiveness of Advertising
(Adstock Model), Media Selection Models (Linear Media Alloca-
tion Model, Monte Carlo Media Allocation Simulation), Online
Advertising, Klout Score, Tipping Point, Watt’s Model for Viral
Marketing, Text Mining.
MPBA G525 Digital Analytics 3*
Understanding web analytics; Finding data for web analytics;
Web analytics tools; Discovering bots; Knowing website visitors;
Clickstream analytics; Identifying most important webpages; Key
performance indicators; Increasing website visibility; Deciding
online advertising strategy; Fine-tuning website; Competitive in-
telligence analysis; Understanding Social Media; Foundations of
social, mobile and video analytics; Creating Value with Social
Media Analytics; Analytics-Business Alignment; Capturing Value
with Network Analytics, Text Analytics and Actions Analytics;
Social Media Analytics Capabilities; Social Media Security, Pri-
vacy & Ethics. The course necessarily involves the use of statis-
tical software and programming languages.
MPBA G526 Pricing Analytics 3*
This course provides an introduction to both the theory and the
practice of revenue management and pricing, Fundamentals of
price theory, Segmentation and price differentiation, Break- even
analysis, Price sensitivity and willingness-to-pay, Empirical esti-
mations of price-response functions, Price optimization, Mark-
down optimization, The hedonic pricing model, Revenue Man-
agement, Big Data and pricing analytics, Monte Carlo simulation
for pricing decisions, Conjoint analysis for pricing decisions. The
course necessarily involves the use of statistical software and
programming languages.
MPBA G527 Retail Analytics 3*
Retail business’s business intelligence environment, retail pro-
cesses, methods, and technologies, retail information systems,
retail consumers, data-driven tools and theoretical analytical
models, analytical tools for retail, statistical methods in econo-
metrics and machine learning like -single and multivariate linear
regressions, logistic regressions, and classification trees, mer-
chandising analytics, customer analytics, managing in-store en-
vironment & operations, inventory, sales and its trends, loyalty
marketing and ‘retail data reporting & visualization’. The course
necessarily involves the use of statistical software and pro-
gramming languages.
MPBA G528 Customer Engagement and Analytics 3*
Customer acquisition: RFM scoring, Customer characteristics,
Company-interaction variables, Clickstream data, Linear regres-
sion model, logit/probit model, transaction usage clustering,
Probability models. Customer development: Regression model,
logistic regression model, Markov decision process, Structural
equation model. Customer retention: Dependence between cus-
tomer value, customer engagement and churn probability, Non-
parametric models. The course necessarily involves the use of
statistical software and programming languages.
MPBA G529 Marketing Research & Metrics 3*
Elements of marketing research process viz. Problem Definition,
Development of an approach to the Problem, Research Design
formulation, Exploratory, Descriptive and experimental, Field-
work & Data collection, Data preparation & Analysis, univariate,
bivariate and multivariate statistical techniques, Report prepara-
tion and Presentation. Marketing metrics. Nonfinancial metrics:
Brand awareness, Test drive, Churn, Customer satisfaction
(CSAT) and Take rate; Financial metrics: Profit, Net present val-
ue (NPV), Internal rate of return (IRR), Payback, Customer life-
time value (CLTV), Cost per click (CPC), Transaction conversion
rate (TCR), Return on ad dollars spent (ROA), Bounce Rate and
VI
Word of mouth (WOM).
Equvalent: MBA G560
MPBA G530 Financial Analytics 3*
Financial Statistics, data exploration using fundamentals, returns
evaluation, gauging market sentiment, prediction using funda-
mentals, forecasting financial time-series, portfolio analytics:
Sharpe ratio, Markowitz mean-variance optimization, portfolio al-
location using regularization, portfolio strategies, dynamic portfo-
lio selection, portfolio tracking, and rebalancing, Simulating Trad-
ing Strategies. Market structure, mechanics of algorithmic, tax-
onomy of data used in algorithmic trading, market microstruc-
ture, high-frequency data, computational resources and algo-
rithms for high-frequency trading.
MPBA G531 Financial Derivatives and Analysis 3*
Futures and Forward Contracts: Futures Markets, Currency Fu-
tures, and Forward Contracts, Equity Index Futures, Interest
Rate and Bond Futures and Forward Contracts, Fundamental of
Options Trading, Option Strategies, Option Hedging, Option
Pricing, The Binomial Option Pricing, The Black_Scholes Option
Pricing Model, Pricing Non-Stock Options and Future Options,
Pricing Bond and Interest Rate Options, Financial Swap, Credit
Default and Currency Swaps.
MPBA G532 Financial Modelling and Valuation 3*
Introduction to valuation, the role of financial statements, steps
in business valuation, different approaches to valuation, strategy
analysis, accounting analysis, financial analysis, prospective
analysis, deal analysis, credit analysis, and corporate gov-
ernance.
MPBA G533 Financial Technology 3*
Introduction to FinTech landscape, Blockchain technologies,
Crypto-assets and their ecosystem, FinTech Business Plans,
FinTech Start-ups, Technology Stack Evaluation to develop
fintech products, Payments, Lending, FinTech in Incumbents,
InsureTech, AI in Finance, Regulations in FinTech, Risks in
fintech, Identify opportunities in emerging internet and finance
sectors and develop a fintech product, Evaluation of the market
potential of fintech-startup, fund-raising for fintech start-ups,
Cryptocurrencies disruption in venture capital funding.
MPBA G534 People Analytics 3*
Introduction to People Analytics, HR Business Processes and
HR Analytics, People Analytics and Data, Descriptive Analytics:
Data Visualization in HR using Excel and Tableau, Predictive
Analytics: Application of GLM procedures using MS Excel and R
Commander, Predictive Analytics: Application of Supervised and
Unsupervised Learning, Text Analytics: Applications in Orange
MPBA G535 Strategy Analytics 3*
Creating competitive advantage through Data; Role of analytics
in strategic management; Drawing insights from data for envi-
ronmental scanning; Analytics concepts for strategy formulation
& prioritization; optimization tools & techniques for strategy im-
plementation; Metrics for strategy evaluation & control; Design-
ing intelligent information System for key stakeholders; Solving
real-life case problems using analytical tools.
MPBA G536 Knowledge Management and Digital
3*
Strategy
This course introduces the models and definitions of Knowledge
Management, The information management cycle, Policies,
tools, and techniques for knowledge management, Digital
Trends: Big data, business analytics, and artificial intelligence.
Knowledge management strategy, Digital strategy and business
models of technology companies, Role of social media strategy
in supporting knowledge flows, Enablers and barriers in
knowledge sharing and knowledge transfer, Learning Organisa-
tions, Communities of Practice, Artificial Intelligence (AI) ethics,
and the future of professions.
MPBA G537 Data Structures and Algorithmic Think-
2 1 3
ing
Recursion and backtracking, Linked List and Arrays, Stack and
Queues, Trees, Priority Queues, Maps and Hash Tables,
Disjoint Sets, Graphs, Text Processing
Pre-requisite: MPBA G507 Programming for Analytics
I-83
MPBA G538 Critical Product Management 3*
Purpose and role of a PM, PM: Myth vs. Reality; Telling Your
Product Story; Deeper Dive into Product Build, UX research, UX
Design Sprints, User Experimentation (A/B Testing), PM - UX
Partnership, Technical savviness to give directions to and men-
tor Engineering, Writing PRFAQ and/or PRD; Data Experimenta-
tion & Measurement Programs; Ensuring a successful product,
GTM strategy, Naming, Pricing, Launch; Stages: Private Pre-
view, Limited Preview, General Availability (or as known as al-
pha, beta, general release); Having difficult conversations and
prioritizations: Build the Product Roadmap; Strategy: Short term
vs. Long term; Analytics: From Vision to Metrics to Insights
(North Star, Counter Metrics, Guardrail Metrics), Adding color to
analytics; Soft skills.
Mechanical Engineering
ME F110 Workshop Practice 0 4 2
Laboratory exercises for different manufacturing processes like
machining on lathe, drilling, grinding, milling and shaper; sand
moulding and casting; metal forming; joining processes like arc
welding, gas welding, brazing and soldering; carpentry; fitting;
use of metrology equipments in measurement; demonstrations
on CNC machines and CNC part programming.
ME F112 Workshop Practice 1 1 2
Engineering materials, casting, forming, machining, joining,
powder metallurgy, additive manufacturing, plastic processing,
various other manufacturing processes and related laboratory
exercises.
ME F211 Mechanics of Solids 3 0 3
Fundamental principles of mechanics, introduction of mechanics
of deformable bodies, force and moment transmitted by slender
members (2D truss, frame, beam), stress and strain, stress-
strain-temperature relations, torsion of circular member, stress
and deflection due to bending, buckling of columns, theories of
failure.
ME F212 Fluid Mechanics 3 0 3
Fluid statics, fundamental of mass, momentum and energy
transfer, control volume approach and integral equations, differ-
ential analysis of mass, momentum and energy transfer, solu-
tions for one-dimensional steady-state situations, viscous and
inviscid flow, dimensional analysis, compressible fluid flow.
ME F213 Materials Science & Engineering 2 0 2
Introduction, Structure of Materials (Metal and Ceramics), Dislo-
cations, heat treatment of steel and strengthening Mechanisms
of Metals, Phase diagrams, Iron-carbide phase diagram, Phase
transformation in Metals, Mechanical and thermal properties of
Metals, Polymers (Structure, processes and properties), powder
metallurgy.
ME F214 Applied Thermodynamics 3 0 3
Availability and irreversibility, thermodynamic relations, gas and
vapor cycles, combined power generation cycles, gas mixtures,
refrigeration cycles, psychometrics and heat load calculations,
gas turbine cycles , compressors, boilers and accessories
ME F215 Mechanical Engineering Laboratory 0 2 2
The course shall aim to train the student in the skill of operation
of instruments and equipments. Testing of mechanical properties
like tensile testing, hardness, impact, bending of beams, spring
testing, basic fluid mechanics experiments like measurements of
pressure, temperature, viscosity, flow measurement, basic elec-
trical & electronics like experiments on diodes, rectifiers,
OPAMPS, dc motors, transformers, induction and synchronous
motors.
ME F216 Materials Science and Engineering 2 1 3
Introduction, structure of materials (metals, ceramics, and poly-
mers), crystalline structure imperfections, amorphous and semi-
crystalline materials, correlation of structure to properties, phase
diagrams & phase transformation, solidification, diffusion and
heat treatment, mechanical behaviour of material. Composites,
advanced-smart materials, and functional materials, criteria for
material selection, economic environmental, and societal issues.
Experiments related to materials testing and characterization
VI
such as tensile, torsion, hardness, impact, non-destructive test-
ing, XRD, SEM, etc.
Equivalent: MF F216
ME F217 Applied Thermodynamics 3 1 4
Thermodynamics relations, gas and vapour cycles, combined
power generation cycles, gas mixtures, refrigeration cycles, psy-
chometrics and heat load calculations, gas turbine cycles, com-
pressors, boilers, and accessories; Experiments related to ap-
plied thermodynamics and fluid mechanics courses.
ME F218 Advanced Mechanics of Solids 2 0 2
3D stress, strain, and generalized Hooke’s law, energy methods,
torsion of noncircular members, shear center and asymmetrical
bending, curved beams, and thick cylinders.
ME F219 Manufacturing Processes 3 1 4
Metal casting: different types of casting processes, casting anal-
ysis, and defects. Metal forming process analysis and defects.
Welding, brazing, and soldering process and defects. Machining
processes and analysis, machine tools, and cutting tool geome-
try. Polymer processing, metrology, and instrumentation: limits,
fits, and tolerances. Related laboratory experiments.
ME F220 Heat Transfer 3 1 4
Fundamental concepts of heat transfer, steady-state and un-
steady-state heat conduction, analytical and empirical relations
for forced and free convection heat transfer, heat exchanger
analysis and design, heat transfer by radiation, boiling, and con-
densation, introduction to mass transfer; associated laboratory.
ME F221 Mechanisms and Machines 3 0 3
Kinematics of mechanism: introduction to mechanisms, position,
displacement, velocity, acceleration analysis, synthesis of planar
mechanism, cam design, kinematics of gears, gear trains, dy-
namics of machines: static force analysis, dynamic force analy-
sis (planar), dynamics of reciprocating engines, balancing, fly-
wheels, gyroscopes, introduction to spatial & compliant mecha-
nism, exposure to modeling and simulation tools.
Equivalent: MF F221
ME F241 Machine Design & Drawing 3 1 4
Fundamentals and principles of Design. Design and selection of
Machine elements such as shafts, Screw fasteners, Welded
joints, Springs, Brakes & Clutches, Bearings & Gears. Funda-
mentals of Machine Drawing; practices for Orthographic drawing
of machine parts, sectional view, assembly drawing & exploded
view.
ME F242 IC Engines 2 0 2
Working cycles and operation of two stroke, four stroke SI and
CI engine cycles. Ignition, combustion, alternative fuels, emis-
sion and their control.
ME F243 Production Techniques I 2 1 3
Metal casting methods, patterns and molding, different types of
casting processes, injection molding, die casting and casting de-
fects. Casting analysis. Metal forming, different bulk metal form-
ing processes like rolling, extrusion, forging and wire drawing.
Metal forming process analysis and forming defects. Welding,
brazing and soldering, different techniques and welding defects.
Welding analysis. Simple description of various machining oper-
ations, machine tools and cutting tool geometry. Limits & Fits
and Metrology. Fabrication project.
ME F244 Kinematics & Dynamics of Machinery 3 0 3
Kinematics of mechanism: introduction to mechanisms, position,
displacement, velocity, acceleration analysis, Synthesis of
mechanisms (Planer), cam design, Kinematics of gears (spur,
helical, bevel and worm), gear trains, Dynamics of machines:
static force analysis, dynamic force analysis (planar),dynamics
of reciprocating engines, balancing, cam dynamics, flywheels,
governors and gyroscopes.
ME F266 Study Project 3
These courses include projects which are oriented towards read-
ings from published literature or books about new frontiers of
development or analysis of available database. These courses
are normally available to students in second or higher levels.
I-84
These courses must coterminate with project reports.
ME F311 Heat Transfer 3 1 4
Fundamental concepts of heat transfer; steady state and un-
steady- state heat conduction; analytical and empirical relations
for forced and free convection heat transfer; heat exchanger
analysis and design, heat transfer by radiation; associated la-
boratory.
ME F312 Advanced Mechanics of Solids 3 0 3
Generalized Hooke’s law; Energy methods; torsion of non-
circular members; shear center and asymmetrical bending;
curved beams; thick cylinders; plates and shells; contact stress.
ME F313 Production Techniques II 3 1 4
Metal cutting theory. Analysis, economics and quality control of
metal cutting, laboratory exercises in metal cutting and fabrica-
tion project. Different machine tools their description and opera-
tion. Non-traditional machining processes. Micro-manufacturing
technologies. Introduction to computer aided manufacturing
(CAM), CNC machines and CNC part programming.
ME F314 Design of Machine Elements 3 0 3
Design methodology, fundamental principles, materials, design
for static failure, design for fatigue failure, design and selection
of machine elements such as shafts, screw fasteners, welded
joints, springs, belt drive, brakes & clutches, bearings & gears.
Equivalent: MF F314
ME F315 Advanced Manufacturing Processes 2 1 3
Unconventional manufacturing processes and analysis, micro-
manufacturing technologies, introduction to computer-aided
manufacturing, CNC machines, CNC part programming, additive
manufacturing, modeling & simulation of manufacturing pro-
cesses, surface technologies. Related laboratory exercises and
fabrication project.
ME F316 Manufacturing Management 2 0 2
Introduction to manufacturing systems, forecasting, life cycle
concepts, facility location and layout planning, aggregate and
batch production planning, scheduling, inventory control, materi-
al requirement planning, and enterprise resource planning, just-
in-time and lean manufacturing, total quality management, sup-
ply chain management and Industry 4.0.
ME F317 Engines, Motors, and Mobility 2 0 2
Introduction - injection & ignition systems, lubrication, and cool-
ing, measurement, and testing, emissions and control; fuel-air
cycles; actual cycles; conventional fuels; combustion; alternate
fuels; modern mobility solutions; electric and hybrid vehicles;
comparisons of conventional vehicles with electric vehicles in
terms of advantages, disadvantages, and applications.
ME F318 Computer-Aided Design 1 2 3
Mathematical modeling of parametric curves, surfaces and sol-
ids. Geometric transformations, isometric transformations includ-
ing translation, scaling, reflection, and rotation using specialized
solid modeling packages. CAD/CAM data exchange. Introduc-
tion to FEM & FEA practice on a specialized CAE package.
Modeling and simulation based practical exercises related to ge-
ometric modeling, finite element analysis, and machine drawing
such as orthographic drawing, sectional view, assembly drawing
& exploded view.
ME F319 Vibrations and Control 3 0 3
Small oscillations of linear dynamical systems, free and forced
vibrations of single and multi-degree-of-freedom systems, nor-
mal modes and orthogonality relations, generalized coordinates,
and Lagrange's equations, matrix formulation, eigen-value prob-
lem, and numerical solutions, transient response of one-
dimensional systems. Introduction to continuous system, vibra-
tion measurement and analysis, closed loop control, convention-
al and non-conventional control strategies, transfer function, dy-
namic response, and stability criteria, state space approach and
exposure to simulation tools.
ME F320 Engineering Optimization 3 0 3
Formulation of optimization problems, classical optimization
techniques, nonlinear optimization methods for problems with
and without constraints, simplex method, duality and sensitivity
VI
concepts, revised simplex methods, transportation models, trav-
elling-salesman models, assignment models, network models,
integer programming, genetic algorithm and other evolutionary
optimization techniques, goal programming and multi-objective
optimization. Use of application softwares in solving optimization
problems.
Equivalent: MF F320
ME F321 Data Mining in Mechanical Sciences 2 1 3
Introduction to data mining, clustering, classification & associa-
tion, sequence analysis, regressions method, decision trees,
machine learning, neural networks, SVM for engineering and
manufacturing applications, data mining for product design, ap-
plications of data mining in production, planning and scheduling,
data mining for defect identification, process and quality control,
application of data mining in maintenance, data analysis for ma-
chine and manufacturing process monitoring, introduction to
cyber physical systems, introduction to big data handling and big
data analytics.
ME F323 Energy Storage Technologies 3 0 3
Introduction, necessity of energy storage, classification, princi-
ples, challenges, comparison and applications of energy storage
technologies. Mechanical energy storage: Flywheel, compressed
air and pumped hydro energy storage. Thermal energy storage:
Sensible heat, cryogenic storage, phase change materials, latent
heat enthalpy, charging and discharging, thermochemical energy
storage, sorption and desorption reactions. Electrochemical en-
ergy storage: Lead-acid batteries, ionic batteries, fuel cells, flow
batteries, super-capacitors. Chemical energy storage: Hydrogen
storage methods, power-to-gas and synthetic fuels. Challenges
and solutions through different energy storage technologies.
ME F427 Continuum Mechanics 3 1 4
Introduction to tensors, tensor algebra and tensor calculus. Kin-
ematics of deformation (displacement, velocity, deformation gra-
dient, material and spatial field descriptions, description of local
deformation, linearized kinematics, kinematic rates), left & right
Cauchy-Green deformation tensor, Cauchy-Lagrangian strain
tensor. Traction and stress (first Piola-Kirchhoff stress, second
Piola-Kirchhoff stress, Biot stress etc). Mechanical conservation
and balance laws (conservation of mass, conservation of linear
momentum, conservation of angular momentum, conservation of
energy, work done by stresses and the principle of virtual work,
BVP, IVP, calculus of variation). Constitutive relations (con-
straints on constitutive relations, frame indifference, objectivity,
material symmetry, constitutive models for linearly elastic, hy-
perelastic solids and fluid flows).
ME F428 Smart Materials 3 1 4
Overview of smart materials. Piezoelectric materials (Ceramics
and polymers), Electro and Magneto-Rheological Fluids, Shape
Memory Alloys (SMA) – One way and two-way SMAs, Magnetic
Shape Memory Alloys (M-SMA), Fiber optic sensors, Miscella-
neous smart materials – Magnetostrictive, electrostrictive mate-
rials and others. Basic modelling of smart materials, Dynamics
and control knowledge for smart materials. Applications in the
field of civil, mechanical, aerospace, biomedical, energy indus-
try such as sensors and actuators, vibration control and damp-
ing, structural health monitoring. Intelligent devices based
on smart materials.
Pre-requisites: ME F216 or MF F216 or CHE F243
ME F429 Micro-Nanoscale Heat Transport 3 1 4
Introduction to energy carriers at micro/nanoscale, energy levels
at micro/nanoscale, energy transport by waves and particles,
energy quantization, energy states in solids, scattering and heat
generation processes, statistical thermodynamics, mi-
cro/nanoscale heat transport: Phonon specific heat, thermal
conductance, thermal conductivity, convection and radiation, en-
tropy of energy states. Classical laws, Boltzmann transport
equation, deviation from classical laws at micro/nanoscale, pho-
non-phonon transport, electron-phonon transport. Applications of
micro/nanoscale heat transport: micro heat exchanger, micro
heat pipes, thermoelectric devices, microchannel heat sinks, mi-
croelectronics, nanomaterials, nanoencapsulated heat storage
materials, nanofluids, nanoscale thin films and nanosensors.
Pre-requisites: ME F220 OR CHE F241
I-85
ME F340 Introduction to Sports Engineering 3 0 3
The course essentially prepares engineering students to utilize
their existing technical knowhow for sports applications. The
specific topics will include, working with human and human
movement patterns, qualitative and quantitative techniques for
analysis of human movement. Sports performance measure and
analysis. Anthropomorphy, Ergonomics and Task design. Com-
puter application in sports, computerized performance measure.
Sports surface and its impact on sports performance, surface
testing methods. Sports and training equipment case study,
business around sports.
ME F341 Prime Movers & Fluid Machines 2 1 3
Theoretical analysis of energy and momentum transfer between
fluid and rotor; principles of axial, mixed and radial flow com-
pressors, turbines and pumps; design considerations; cascade
aerodynamics and performance limitations; applications to pow-
er plant systems; model similitude for turbo-machines; Introduc-
tion to fluid power system, laboratory exercises in testing recip-
rocating machines, rotary machines and fluid power system.
ME F342 Computer Aided Design 3 1 4
CAD software and CAD hardware. Mathematical modeling of
parametric curves, surfaces and solids, and their computer simu-
lation on spreadsheets and using specialized solid modeling
packages. CAD/CAM data exchange. Introduction to finite ele-
ment analysis and FEM practice on a specialized CAE package.
Rapid prototyping. Students will be required to do several as-
signments and one CAD project.
ME F343 Mechanical Vibrations 3 0 3
Small oscillations of linear dynamical systems, free and forced
vibrations of single and multi-degree-of-freedom systems, nor-
mal modes and orthogonality relations, generalized co-ordinates
and Lagrange's equations, matrix formulation, eigenvalue prob-
lem and numerical solutions, transient response of one-
dimensional systems, approximate energy methods, continuous
system, vibration of string, rods, bars and beams. Introduction to
control systems.
ME F344 Engineering Optimization 2 0 2
Linear programming methods, simplex method, transportation
model and its variants, queuing systems, PERT/CPM, Optimal
problem formulation, engineering optimization problems, single
variable optimization algorithms, multivariable optimization algo-
rithms, constrained optimization algorithms.
ME F366 Lab Project 3
ME F367 Lab Project 3
These courses include projects involving laboratory investigation
or laboratory development in the students discipline or interdis-
ciplinary areas. These courses are normally available to stu-
dents in third or higher levels. These courses must coterminate
with project reports.
ME F376 Design Project 3
ME F377 Design Project 3
These courses are intended to impart training in design of prod-
uct/ process or other artifact to the students in the discipline or
interdisciplinary areas. These courses are normally available to
students in third or higher levels. These courses must cotermi-
nate with project reports.
ME F411 Fluid Power Systems 3 1 4
Introduction to Fluid power, advantages of fluid power, applica-
tions, Introduction to Pneumatics, Air preparation and Compo-
nents, Pneumatics Circuits and Applications, Electro pneumat-
ics, Electrical Controls for fluid power circuits, , Physical proper-
ties of hydraulic fluids, Energy and Power in Hydraulic Systems,
Frictional Losses in Hydraulic Pipelines, Hydraulic Pumps, Hy-
draulic Cylinders and Cushioning Devices, Hydraulic Motors,
Hydraulic Valves, Hydraulic Circuit Design and Analysis, Ancil-
lary Hydraulic Devices, Hydraulic Conductions and Fittings,
Maintenance of Hydraulic Systems, Use of PLC programming for
interfacing pneumatics and Hydraulic Circuits.
ME F412 Production Planning and Control 3 0 3
Generalized model of production systems; types of production
VI
flows; life cycle concepts; facilities location and layout planning;
aggregate and batch production planning; inventory systems;
materials requirements planning; elements of monitoring & pro-
duction control.
ME F413 Nonlinear Vibrations 3 0 3
Introduction, sources of nonlinearity, examples, qualitative anal-
ysis: phase plane, singular points, stability of singular points,
Forced response, Perturbation methods: straightforward expan-
sion, the method of multiple scales, harmonic balance, method
of averaging, Nonlinear normal modes, Nonlinear Multiple-DOF
Systems, Bifurcations, Centre manifold reduction, Flouquet The-
ory, Chaos Theory, Melnikov Criterion, Applications to vehicle
dynamics, structures and microsystems etc. Use of softwares for
simulations and numerical solutions.
ME F414 Fuel Cell Science and Technology 3*
Introduction to fuel cell, types, advantages and applications;Fuel
cell thermodynamics, electrochemistry, chargetransport, heat
and mass transport; Fuel cell modelling andsimulation. In-situ,
ex-situ experimental characterizationtechniques viz. polarization
curve, electrochemicalimpedance spectroscopy, current density
mapping etc.Polymer electrolyte membrane fuel cell including di-
rectliquid fuel cell; Other fuel cells viz. SOFC, AFC,
MCFC,PAFC, biological fuel cells etc. and recent development.
ME F415 Gas Dynamics 3 0 3
Introduction to Gas Dynamics, Basic equations of compressible
flow, Wave propagation, Steady one-dimensional flow (Varying-
area adiabatic flow), Normal shock waves, Oblique shock and
expansion waves, Prandtl-Meyer Flow, Flow with Friction and
Heat Transfer, Potential equation for compressible flow, Similari-
ty rule.
ME F416 Reverse Engineering and Rapid Prototyping 3 0 3
Introduction to reverse engineering, methodologies and tech-
niques for reverse engineering, reverse engineering hardware
and software, selecting reverse engineering system, introduction
to rapid prototyping, relationship between reverse engineering
and rapid prototyping. Reverse engineering in automotive engi-
neering, aerospace engineering, medical device industry. Legal
aspects and barriers for reverse engineering. Project work.
ME F417 Advanced Metal Forming 3 0 3
The stress and strain tensors in macroscopic plasticity and fail-
ure criteria for metal forming, effective stress and effective strain,
flow rules for plastic deformation and principle of normality. Work
hardening, determination of work hardening exponent. Plastic
instability and effect of inhomogeneity on uniform strain. Strain
rate and temperature effects on plastic deformation and flow
stress, super-plasticity, temperature rise during metal forming.
Ideal work and redundant work. Slab, upper-bound, slip-line field
and finite element methods of analysis of various bulk and sheet
metal forming processes. Bulk and sheet metal formability tests
and forming limit diagram. Sheet metal properties and plastic an-
isotropy.
ME F418 Rocket and Spacecraft Propulsion 3 0 3
Thrust and specific impulse. Compressible flows. Detailed anal-
ysis of liquid, solid and hybrid propulsion systems. Includes pro-
pellants, injection systems, combustion and chemical equilibri-
um, thrust chambers, nozzles and plumes. Electro-thermal
thrusters. Plasmas and electromagnetic thrusters.
ME F419 Total Product Integration Engineering 3 0 3
Quality design across global supply chain. Robust product archi-
tecture for market variety and technology advances. Product de-
velopment risk management.
ME F420 Power Plant Engineering 3 0 3
Classification of power plants. Components and layout of; ther-
mal, nuclear, hydro electric power plants. Site selection for vari-
ous power plants. Combined cycle power plants. Magneto Hydro
Dynamics (MHD) systems. Economics of power generation,
economic loading of power stations. Load curve analysis; load
factor, diversity factor. Power plant instrumentation and controls.
ME F423 Micro Fluidics and its Application 4*
Introduction to microfluidics, scaling in microfluidics, theoretical
microfluidics, Philosophy of Computational Fluid Dynamics,
I-86
Concepts of discretization, fabrication techniques for microfluidic
devices, microvalves, micropumps, microflow sensors, microflu-
idics for life sciences: micromixers, microneedles, microfilters,
microseparators, microreactors, modeling and simulation on
CAD tool.
ME F424 Energy Management 3 0 3
World and Indian energy scenario; energy policy;energy man-
agement principles; energy conservation;energy auditing; analy-
sis; formulation of energymanagement options; economic evalu-
ation,implementation & control; energy conservationtechniques –
conservation in energy intensiveindustries; choice of fuels and
stoichiometry, steamgeneration, distribution systems, and elec-
tricalsystems; integrated resource planning; demand-
sidemanagement; cogeneration; total energy schemes;thermal
insulation; energy storage; economicevaluation of conservation
technologies; analysis oftypical applications.
ME F425 Additive Manufacturing 3 0 3
Introduction to Additive Manufacturing (AM),generalized AM pro-
cess and process chain, differentmaterials used in AM, Use of
multiple materials,multifunctional and graded materials in AM,
Role ofsolidification rate. Various AM processes and theirme-
chanics of operation. Vat polymerization process-
es,stereolithography. Powder based AM processesinvolving sin-
tering and melting, selective lasersintering, direct metal laser sin-
tering, selective lasermelting, other polymer, ceramic, metal and
alloyK-4powder based AM processes. Extrusion based AMpro-
cesses, fused deposition modelling (FDM). Sheetlamination pro-
cesses, laminated object manufacturing(LOM). Micro- and
nano‐additive manufacturingprocesses; Modelling in Additive
ManufacturingTransport phenomena models: temperature and
fluidflow, molten pool formation, Various case studies ‐modelling
of fusion based AM process, powder bedmelting based process,
droplet based printing process;Applications of Additive Manufac-
turing in Aerospace,Automotive, Electronics industries and Bio-
medicalapplications.
ME F426 Industry 4.0 in Manufacturing 3 0 3
Limitations of existing manufacturing systems,industrial revolu-
tion 4.0 for manufacturing, vision andstrategy, organization and
structure, models andstandards, drivers and enablers, smart
products, smartprocess, smart production, smart factories,
smartnetworked industries, smart supply chain, lean andI4.0.
I4.0 navigators: sensors, actuators, data analytics,connectivity,
and AI. Economic evaluation of existingsystem for I4.0. Limita-
tions of I4.0. Case studies.
ME F432 Computer Aided Manufacturing 2 1 3
Introduction, features of NC machine tools, NC part program-
ming, CAM system devices, interpolators for manufacturing sys-
tems, control loops of NC systems, computerized numerical con-
trol, adaptive control systems, CAD to CAM, CAPP, industrial
robots, computer aided production planning & control, computer
aided inspection and quality control, CIM systems.
ME F433 Solar Thermal Process Engineering 3 1 4
Fundamentals of solar energy, earth-sun angles, solar spectrum,
solar radiation, measurement and estimation of solar energy on
horizontal and tilted surface, conversion routes and technolo-
gies, Standards and Performance Testing, thermal utilization of
solar energy, modes of heat transfer and equations for perfor-
mance calculations of systems- conduction, convection and ra-
diation of heat, Flat plate collectors, solar concentrator systems,
geometric optics, tracking methods, thermal analysis, energy
storage, materials and properties, solar process loads and sys-
tem calculations for time dependent loads, Life cycle cost analy-
sis and economic analysis for various applications of solar ther-
mal processes, solar water heating, space heating and cooling in
Buildings, Industrial process heating, solar air-conditioning and
refrigeration, Use of Simulation tools for performance simulation
and Project Assignments, solar thermal power generation, Role
of Govt., policies and plans.
ME F441 Automotive Vehicles 3 0 3
Internal combustion engines; vehicle performance; analysis and
design of vehicle components. Experimental or theoretical inves-
tigation of problems selected from the field of automotive vehi-
cles.
VI
ME F443 Quality Control, Assurance and Reliability 3 0 3
Basic concepts of probability and probability distributions, stand-
ard probability distribution, sampling and sampling distributions,
confidence intervals, testing significance, statistical tolerance,
various types of control charts, statistical process control tech-
niques, value analysis, defect diagnosis and prevention, basic
concepts of reliability, reliability design evaluation and control,
methods of applying total quality management, production pro-
cess.
ME F451 Mechanical Equipment Design 3 0 3
Design analysis for additional machine elements; retainment of
bearings and design of machine housing; introduction to tech-
niques of optimisation reliability and value analysis; exercises in
detail design; design solutions to meet specified functional re-
quirements.
ME F452 Composite Materials & Design 3 0 3
Introduction to composites, concepts of reinforcement, strength-
ening mechanisms, fibrous reinforcements, matrix materials, mi-
cro-mechanical aspects of composites, manufacturing methods,
composite production design methods-design of tensile mem-
bers, pressure vessels, storage tanks, and other chemical pro-
cess equipment made of FRP, design of joints, damage of com-
posites by impact, FRP grids, recent development in manufac-
turing of composites and technologies.
ME F461 Refrigeration and Air conditioning 3 0 3
Principles, thermodynamic analysis, load estimates and design
of various refrigeration and air conditioning systems for comfort
and industrial applications. Theoretical or experimental investi-
gation of refrigeration and air-conditioning problems.
ME F472 Precision Engineering 3 0 3
Concept of accuracy, accuracy of numerical control systems,
tolerances and fits, acceptance tests for machine tools, static
stiffness and its influence on machining accuracy, inaccuracies
due to thermal effects, influence of forced vibrations on accura-
cy, dimensional wear of cutting tools and its influences on accu-
racy, clamping and setting errors, location principles and errors
due to location, surface roughness and microfinishing process-
es, dimensioning and dimensional chains, methods of improving
accuracy and surface finish, thread and gear measuring instru-
ments, coordinate measuring machines, introduction to comput-
er aided tolerancing.
ME F481 Project Appraisal 3 0 3
Course Description is to be developed.
ME F482 Combustion 3 0 3
Fuels, Combustion, Adiabatic Flame Temperature, Chemical Ki-
netics, Chain Reactions, Conservation Equations for Reacting
Flows, Laminar and Turbulent Premixed Flames, Diffusion
Flames, Droplet and Particle Combustion, Emissions, Applica-
tions.
ME F483 Wind Energy 3 0 3
Historic development of wind energy technology, basic principles
of wind energy conversion, different types of wind machines and
their performances, wind rotor aerodynamics and its application
in the turbine design, statistical methods of measurement and
analysis of wind spectra for energy use, developing models for
estimating the wind energy potential of a prospective site, Con-
structional features of various systems and sub-systems of a
Wind Energy Conversion System(WECS), Features of wind
farms, performance models of WECS, Optimal matching of
WECS, environmental aspects of wind energy conversion, Eco-
nomics of wind energy conversion.
ME F484 Automotive Technology 3 0 3
Automotive vehicle: layout, operating systems, components, ma-
terials and production processes; Power unit: IC engine, working
principles, performance, systems and the associated parts; Me-
chanical unit: transmission, drive train, steering, chassis, sus-
pension, brakes, wheels and tyres; Electric unit: battery, charg-
ing, starter and lighting; Electronic control unit: application of
electronics and computers, sensors, actuators and on-board di-
agnostics; Latest Trends: advanced combustion systems and
hybrid/fuel-cell/electrical power systems, alternate fuels and the
I-87
emissions.
ME F485 Numerical Techniques for Fluid Flow and 3 0 3
Heat Transfer
Introduction to CFD,Partial Differential Equation (PDE): Physical
classifications, Mathematical Classifications, Well posed prob-
lem. Basic of Discretization Methods: Finite difference method,
Truncation error, consistency, error and stability analysis, con-
vergence, various discretization schemes. Introduction commer-
cial software: OpenFOAM or Fluent. Application of numerical
methods to selected model equations: Wave equation, Heat
equation, Laplace's equations. Solution of Navier-Stokes equa-
tion for incompressible flows.
ME F491 Special Project 3
This is an unstructured open-ended course where under the
overall supervision of an instructor-in-charge, batches of stu-
dents will be attached to different instructors. Each batch will
work on a specific time-bound project which is of basic or pe-
ripheral concern of his discipline. Each student must submit a
project report as a culmination of his endeavour and investiga-
tion. The instructor- in-charge will determine the choice of the
project and also whether or not the project report is to be submit-
ted jointly by a group or individually by a student. The course will
aim to evaluate student's actual ability to use the fundamentals
of knowledge and to meet new unknown situations as demon-
strated by the students' interaction with the instructors and in-
structor-in- charge and aggregated in the project report. The in-
structor-in- charge may assign specific hours for formal brain-
storming sessions.
ME G511 Mechanisms & Robotics 2 3 5
Classification of robots & manipulators; fields of application; syn-
thesis of planar & spatial mechanisms; methods of function &
path generation; coupler curve synthesis; linkages with open
loop; actuators & drive elements; microprocessor application and
control of robots.
ME G512 Finite Element Methods 5
Fundamental concepts, matrix algebra and gaussian limination,
one-dimensional problems, trusses, two-dimensional problems
using constant strain triangles, axisymmetric solids subjected
to axisymmetric loading, two-dimensional isoparametric ele-
ments and numerical integration, beams and frames, three-
dimensional problems in stress analysis, scalar field problems,
dynamic considerations, pre-processing and post processing.
ME G513 Heating and Cooling of Buildings 3 2 5
Introduction to HVAC design, basic scientific principles, climatic
conditions, building heat transmission surfaces, infiltration and
ventilation, heating loads, heat gains and cooling loads, HVAC
psychometrics, codes and standards for HVAC systems design,
acoustics and vibration, human comfort, air distribution, duct
system design, fans and central air systems, air system heating
and cooling, air cleaning and filtration, introduction to electrical
systems, controls for air distribution systems.
ME G514 Turbomachinery 3 2 5
Introduction, thermodynamics, gas turbine plants, steam turbine
plants, fluid dynamics, dimensional analysis and performance
parameters, flow through cascades, axial turbine stages, high
temperature turbine stages, axial compressor stages, centrifugal
compressor stages, radial turbine stages, axial fans and propel-
lers, centrifugal fans and blowers, and wind turbines.
ME G515 Computational Fluid Dynamics 3 2 5
Philosophy of computational fluid dynamics (CFD), governing
equations of fluid dynamics, mathematical behavior of partial
differential equations, basics of the numerics : basic aspects of
discretization, grids with appropriate transformations, and sim-
ple CFD techniques, applications, numerical solutions of quasi-
one-dimensional nozzle flows, numerical solution of a two-
dimensional supersonic flow, incompressible couette flow, and
supersonic flow over a flat plate, advanced topics in CFD.
ME G516 Energy Systems Engineering 5
Basic concepts of energy conversion, generation of electrical
and thermal energy, transmission and distribution of electrical
energy, load management, detailed analysis of utilization of
thermal energy in : boilers, furnaces, compressors, heat transfer
VI
equipments, and HVAC systems, energy audit, waste heat re-
covery systems, cogeneration, demand side management, and
management and organization of energy saving projects.
ME G521 Mechanical System Design 3 2 5
Concept of system design; modeling of structural and kinematic
systems, and determination of system characteristics; reliability
of systems; design of machine elements for specified reliability;
concepts of optimization; techniques of design optimization for
linear and non-linear problems.
ME G532 Machine Tool Engineering 3 2 5
Design principles of machine tools; stiffness and rigidity of sepa-
rate construction elements and their combined behaviour under
load; design of stepped and stepless drives; electrical, mechani-
cal and hydraulic drives; design of bearings and sideways; ma-
chine tool controls; machine tool dynamics; recent developments
in machine tool design.
ME G533 Conduction and Radiation Heat Transfer 5*
Conduction: Steady and unsteady problems and their solutions
in cartesian, cylindrical and spherical coordinates. Separation of
variables. Duhamel’s theorem. Laplace transform. Problems in-
volving change of phase. Inverse heat conduction, Microscale
heat transfer, Radiation: Radiative exchange among black and
grey and spectral surfaces, Shape factors. Applications to cavi-
ties and enclosures. Integral equations approach. Radiation from
gases, vapours and flames.
ME G534 Convective Heat and Mass Transfer 5*
Conservation equations, boundary layers, free convection,
forced convection. Heat transfer in laminar and turbulent, inter-
nal as well as external flows, mixed convection. Combined con-
vection and radiation. Boiling and Condensation. Molecular dif-
fusion in fluids, mass transfer coefficient. Simultaneous heat and
mass transfer; Applications.
ME G535 Advanced Engineering Mathematics 3 2 5
Boundary value problems; wave equations; nonlinear partial dif-
ferential equations; calculus of variations; Eigen value problems;
iteration problems including forward and inverse iteration
schemes – Graham Schmidt deflation – simultaneous iteration
method – subspace iteration – Lanczo’s algorithm – estimation
of core and time requirements.
ME G536 Thermal Equipment Design 5
Course description is to be developed.
ME G537 Cryogenic Engineering 5
Introduction to cryogenics and its applications, properties of cry-
ogenic fluids, properties of materials at cryogenic temperature,
gas-Liquefaction and refrigeration systems, gas separation, cry-
ocoolers, cryogenic insulations, vacuum technology, instrumen-
tation in cryogenics, safety in cryogenics.
ME G538 Toyota Production System 3 2 5
Birth of Toyota production system, house of Toyota production
system, stability, standardization, just-in-time,jidoka, involve-
ment, hoshin planning, Toyota culture, Toyota way, Case Stud-
ies.
ME G539 Computer Integrated Manufacturing 3 2 5
Computer Modeling for mass property analysis. Computer Nu-
merical Control. Computer-aided Manufacturing, operation of
CNC machine tools. Design of manufacturing work cells, Auto-
mated Manufacturing and Programmable Controller.
ME G542 Advanced welding techniques 3 2 5
A detailed overview of Friction welding, Explosive welding, ultra-
sonic welding, and hybrid welding process; working principle and
applications; Heat distribution, metal flow in a liquid and semi-
solid state; alloying element segregation, macro and microstruc-
ture in different weld zones; Selection of welding characteristics
for underwater, extreme hot or cold, and in space conditions;
Thermal modeling and simulations; governing transport phe-
nomena equations, boundary conditions for individual welding
processes; Estimation of the cooling rate, G/R ratio, and grain
growth in weld zones.
I-88
ME G611 Computer Aided Analysis and Design 2 3 5
The course aims at developing complete self reliance in solving
analysis & design problems of engineering with the aid of com-
puters. It stresses upon the use of more powerful tools including
system planning, simulation and modelling. The student will take
up a design project and will work independently on the project
guided by the instructor or resource person as and when re-
quired. The effort must culminate with a CAAD program and a
project report.
ME G612Plastics Engineering 3 2 5
General properties of Plastics, Mechanical Behavior of Plastics,
Processing of Plastics like Extrusion, injection moulding, ther-
moforming, calendaring, rotational moulding, compression
moulding, transfer moulding, analysis of polymer melt flow, rheo-
logical models for polymer melt flow, analysis of heat transfer
during polymer processing, elastic behavior of polymer melts,
testing methods of polymers like DSC, TGA, DMA, XRD etc.
FRP composites, Properties of FRP composites in longitudinal
and transverse directions, volume and weight fraction relation-
ships of fibers, failure mechanisms, mechanical properties and
fiber orientation effects, processing of composite materials, ad-
vancement of composite materials in applications like wind mill
blades, bullet proof jackets, etc.
ME G613 Advanced Finite Element Modelling & Anal- 3 2 5
ysis
Linear bending, modal and stability analysis of structures; incre-
mental-iterative solution methods for nonlinear static and dynam-
ic problems; nonlinear analysis considering geometric nonlineari-
ty; elastoplastic analysis; alternative numerical approaches; in-
dustrial case studies on thermal analysis, coupled field analysis;
fluid flow analysis; fatigue, creep and fracture, crash analysis,
composite structures, shape optimization
Pre-requisite: CE F435 OR CE G619 OR ME G512
ME G621 Fluid Dynamics 2 3 5
Mechanics of turbulent flow; semi-empirical expressions; statisti-
cal concepts; stability theory;flow of non-Newtonian fluids; sta-
tionary and moving shock waves; Prandtl-Mayer expressions;
two and three dimensional subsonic and supersonic flow; meth-
ods of characteristics; small perturbation theory and similarity
rules.
ME G631 Advanced Heat Transfer 3 2 5
Heat conduction with unsteady boundary conditions; recent ad-
vances in natural and forced convection; condensation and boil-
ing phenomena; heat transfer in high speed flows; liquid metal
heat transfer, radioactive metal heat-transfer between surfaces
in absorbing media; complex problems involving simultaneous
conduction, convection and radiation.
ME G641 Theory of Elasticity and Plasticity 3 2 5
Basic equations of theory of elasticity; elementary elasticity prob-
lems in two and three dimensions; theories of plastic flow; prob-
lems in plastic flow of ideally plastic and strain hardening materi-
als; theory of metal forming processes.
Microelectronics
MEL G512 Optoelectronic Devices, Circuits and Sys- 3 2 5
tems
Physics of optical radiation and principles of calculation in radia-
tion physics & optics, fundamental laws of photometry. Interac-
tion between optical radiation and matter. Radiation sources. Pa-
rameters of IR detectors and junction photodetectors, parame-
ters common to emitters and receiver, radiation measurements,
optoelectronic components, optoelectronic integrated devices,
photodetector circuits, methods of modulation and optoelectronic
system design and applications.
MEL G514 Nanoelectronic Memories and Technology 3 2 5
Introduction to memory devices in SRAM, DRAM and 3DNAND
Flash, circuit and device considerations, device fabrication tech-
niques and scaling avenues, memory array addressing, readout
circuits, device characterization, reliability characterization. Non-
volatile memory cell structures like (1T-1C 6T, 4T, 1T-1R, 0T-
1R, 1S-1R, floating gate FLASH, SONOS, NROM), and memory
organization (open bit-line, folded bit-line, NAND, NOR, cross-
VI
point etc.), new memory devices and concepts including (e.g.
magnetic tunnel junction memory (MRAM, SST-RAM), ferroelec-
tric memory (FRAM), phase change memory (PCM), metal oxide
resistive switching memory (RRAM), nanoconductive bridge
memory (CBRAM)
Pre-requisites:
EEE F214: Electronic Devices OR EEE F313: Analog and Digital
VLSI design OR MEL G621: VLSI Design OR MEL G631: Phys-
ics and Modelling of Microelectronic Devices
MEL G531 Testable Design and Fault Tolerant Compu-3 2 5
ting
Fault: types, modelling and simulation; testing methodologies,
coverage, economics and quality; test vector generation: design
for testability, built-in self tests; fault tolerant computing; fault tol-
erant software.
MEL G532 Digital Signal Processing 3 2 5
Introduction; design of analog filters; design of digital filters ( IIR
and FIR); structures for the realization of digital filters; random
signals and random processes; linear estimation and prediction;
Wiener filters; DSP processor architecture; DSP algorithms for
different applications.
MEL G611 IC Fabrication Technology 3 2 5
Material properties; crystal growth and doping; diffusion; oxida-
tion; epitaxy; ion implantation; deposition of films using CVD,
LPCVD and sputtering techniques; wet and dry etching and
cleaning; lithographic process; device and circuit fabrication;
process modeling and simulation.
MEL G612 Integrated Electronics Systems Design 2 2 4
General architectural features of 8/16/32 bit microprocessors,
programmers model of 8086, assembly language programming,
hardware design around 8086, bus based systems design, sys-
tem design around IBM PC, design of real-time systems, ASIC's
development tools.
MEL G621 VLSI Design 3 2 5
Introduction to NMOS and CMOS circuits; NMOS and CMOS
processing technology; CMOS circuits and logic design; circuit
characterization and performance estimation; structured design
and testing; symbolic layout systems; CMOS subsystem design;
system case studies.
MEL G622 Introduction to Artificial Neural Networks 2 2 4
Fundamentals and definitions; Perceptrons, backpropagation
and counterpropagation Networks; Statistical methods for net-
work training; Hopfield nets; Associative memories; Optical neu-
ral networks; Applications of neural networks in speech pro-
cessing, computer networks and visual processing.
MEL G623 Advanced VLSI Design 5
Deep submicron device behavior and models, Interconnect
modeling for parasitic estimation, Clock signals and system tim-
ing--Digital phase locked loop design, memory and array struc-
tures, Input/output circuits design, ASIC technology, FPGA tech-
nology, High speed arithmetic circuits design,-Parallel prefix
computation, Logical effort in circuit design, Low power VLSI cir-
cuits-Adiabatic logic circuits, Multi threshold circuits, Digital
BICMOS circuits, Design of VLSI systems.
MEL G624 Advanced VLSI Architectures 5
Instruction set design and architecture of programmable DSP
architectures; dedicated DSP architectures for filters and FFTs;
DSP transformation and their use in DSP architecture design;
Application Specific Instruction set Processor; superscalar and
VLIW architectures.
MEL G625 Advanced Analog and Mixed Signal Design 5 *
Mixed signal blocks design issues,, design of high resolution,
high speed Comparators,, design of Active Mixers-balanced/ un-
balanced,, Data Converters Architectures, CMOS multipliers ,
dividers and modulators , filters-active/ passive/ switched capaci-
tor, Signal Conditioning and sensor associated circuits, Fre-
quency Synthesizers, Phase Locked Loop, Power Management
Circuits, Integrated Voltage Regulators, Energy Harvesting Cir-
cuits,, Analog Testing, Analog layouts, noise issues, emerging
trends.
I-89
MEL G626 VLSI Test and Testability 5
Fault models and types; automated test generation for combina-
tional logic; test generation for sequential logic; need for adding
testability logic; design for testability; Adhoc DFT methods; struc-
tured DFT; test generation for delay fault; issues in analog circuit
testing and testability.
MEL G631 Physics and Modelling of Microelectronic 3 2 5
Devices
Physics and properties of semiconductor - a review; pn junction
diode; bipolar transistor; metal-semiconductor contacts; JFET
and MESFET; MOSFET and scaling; CCD and photonic devic-
es.
MEL G632 Analog IC Design 3 2 5
Basic Analog IC Design Issues, Analog Layouts, MOS Switch--
Charge Injection, Current And Voltage Biasing and Reference
Generation Circuits,Common Mode Feedback Circuit, Replica
Bias, Design, Analysis and Synthesis of Single StageAmplifiers,
Differential Amplifiers, Operational Amplifiers and Operational
Transconductance Amplifier Design, Low Power OPAMP ,
OPAMP/ OTA design in Subthreshold Operation region, Fre-
quency Compensation, Current Mode Analog Circuit Design,
Noise- Analysis and Estimation In Amplifiers, emerging trends.
MEL G641 CAD for IC Design 3 2 5
Introduction to VLSI design methodologies and supporting CAD
tool environment; overview of `C', data structure, graphics and
CIF; concepts, structures and algorithms of some of the follow-
ing CAD tools; schematic editors; layout editors; module genera-
tors; silicon compilers; placement and routing tools; behavioural,
functional, logic and circuit simulators; aids for test generation
and testing.
MEL G642 VLSI Architectures 2 2 4
Overview of CISC processor architectures; Instruction set archi-
tecture of CISC processor; hardware flow-charting methods; im-
plementing microprocessor logic from hard-ware flowcharts;
RISC instruction set architecture; Pipelined execution of RISC
instructions; pipeline execution unit design; control hazards; de-
sign of memory hierarchy.
Manufacturing Engineering
MF F211 Mechanics of Solids 3 0 3
Fundamental principles of mechanics, introduction of mechanics
of deformable bodies, force and moment transmitted by slender
members (2D truss, frame, beam), stress and strain, stress-
strain-temperature relations, torsion of circular member, stress
and deflection due to bending, buckling of columns, theories of
failure.
MF F212 Fluid Mechanics 3 0 3
Fluid statics, fundamental of mass, momentum and energy
transfer, control volume approach and integral equations, differ-
ential analysis of mass, momentum and energy transfer, solu-
tions for one-dimensional steady-state situations, viscous and
inviscid flow, dimensional analysis, compressible fluid flow.
MF F213 Materials Science & Engineering 2 0 2
Lattice structure and dislocations, binary phase diagrams , iron-
ironcarbide phase diagram, heat treatment of steel, Phase trans-
formation in Metals, Metallurgical techniques for property en-
hancement, Mechanical and thermal properties of Metals, and
polymers, powder metallurgy. Material standards.
MF F214 Applied Thermodynamics 3 0 3
Availability and irreversibility, thermodynamic rela-
tions,Compressible flow, Ideal gas and vapour cycles, combined
power generation cycles, gas mixtures, refrigeration cycles, psy-
chrometrics and Introduction to heat load calculations, gas tur-
bine cycles , compressors, boilers and accessories.
MF F215 Mechanical Engineering Laboratory 0 2 2
The course shall aim to train the student in the skill of operation
of instruments and equipments related to Mechanical Engineer-
ing. Testing of mechanical properties like tensile testing, hard-
ness, impact, bending of beams, spring testing, basic fluid me-
chanics experiments like measurements of pressure, tempera-
VI
ture, viscosity, flow measurement, basic electrical & electronics
like experiments on diodes, rectifiers, OPAMPS, dc motors,
transformers, induction and synchronous motors.
MF F216 Materials Science and Engineering 2 1 3
Introduction, structure of materials (metals, ceramics, and poly-
mers), crystalline structure imperfections, amorphous and semi-
crystalline materials, correlation of structure to properties, phase
diagrams & phase transformation, solidification, diffusion and
heat treatment, mechanical behaviour of material. Composites,
advanced-smart materials, and functional materials, criteria for
material selection, economic environmental, and societal issues.
Experiments related to materials testing and characterization
such as tensile, torsion, hardness, impact, non-destructive test-
ing, XRD, SEM, etc.
Equivalent: ME F216
MF F217 Machine Drawing 0 2 2
Fundamentals of machine drawing and dimensioning practice
using conventional software, orthographic drawing of machine
parts, sectional view, assembly drawing, exploded view, pictorial
view, BOM, materials assignment and graphic rendering.
MF F218 Transport Phenomena in Manufacturing 3 1 4
Transport phenomena and its importance in manufacturing engi-
neering, fundamentals of fluid mechanics, fluid statics, fluids in
motion, heat and mass transfer theories, conservation laws for
transport phenomena and solution methodologies, important so-
lutions and correlations in transport phenomena, radiation heat
transfer and special topics relevant to manufacturing such as
heat transfer with phase change, simultaneous heat and mass
transfer etc.
MF F219 Operations Management 3 0 3
Introduction to operations management, product planning, fore-
casting, facilities location and layout, process planning and de-
sign, performance measures and capacity planning, scheduling
and controlling, material requirements planning and Just-in-time
systems, inventory control, Introduction to Industry 4.0 and oth-
er advancements in operations management, case studies and
software application.
MF F220 Metrology and Quality Assurance 2 1 3
Importance of metrology, calibration, limits fits and toler-
ances, design of gauges, linear and angular measure-
ment, inspection of surface quality, features inspection,
coordinate measuring systems, application of vision, inter-
ferometry, laser, and other non-contact measuring sys-
tems, various case studies on measurement systems
used for automated production systems; quality manage-
ment: practices, tools and standards, statistical techniques
in quality control, statistical process control using control
charts, control charts for attributes, and variables, process
capability analysis, measurement system analysis, ac-
ceptance sampling plan, reliability assessment of systems
and use of commercial software for SQC
MF F221 Mechanisms and Machines 3 0 3
Kinematics of mechanism: introduction to mechanisms, position,
displacement, velocity, acceleration analysis, synthesis of planar
mechanism, cam design, kinematics of gears, gear trains, dy-
namics of machines: static force analysis, dynamic force analy-
sis (planar), dynamics of reciprocating engines, balancing, fly-
wheels, gyroscopes, introduction to spatial & compliant mecha-
nism, exposure to modeling and simulation tools.
Equivalent: ME F221
MF F222 Casting, Forming and Welding 3 1 4
Pattern, mould and gating system design; casting pro-
cesses, defects and inspection. Mechanics of forming
processes; forming operations, friction and lubrication,
forming defects. Principles of solid phase welding and liq-
uid phase welding, soldering, brazing and adhesive bond-
ing; newer welding processes, welding and additive manu-
facturing, weld defects and inspection; plastic processing
and powder metallurgy.
I-90
MF F241 Machine Design & Drawing 3 1 4
Fundamentals and principles of Design. Design and selection of
Machine elements such as shafts, Screw fasteners, Welded
joints, Springs, Brakes & Clutches, Bearings & Gears, Funda-
mentals of machine drawing; practices for orthographic drawing
of machine parts, sectional view, assembly drawing & exploded
view.
MF F242 Manufacturing Management 2 0 2
Introduction, product planning, forecasting, facilities location,
process planning and design, layout of facilities, performance
measures and capacity planning, planning and scheduling, ma-
terial requirements planning and Just-in-time systems, inventory
control, human resource management, financial management,
marketing management, customer relationship management.
MF F243 Manufacturing Processes 2 1 3
Foundry practices and Metal casting methods, Plastic working of
metals, Welding and cutting, Machining Processes and machine
tools. Nonconventional manufacturing processes, Finishing and
Cleaning processes, Limits & Fits. Production quality control,
Manufacturing and environment.
MF F244 Kinematics & Dynamics of Machinery 3 0 3
Kinematics of mechanism: introduction to mechanisms, position,
displacement, velocity, acceleration analysis, cam design, gear
trains, synthesis of linkages. Dynamics of machines: static force
analysis, dynamic force analysis (planar), dynamics of recipro-
cating engines, balancing, cam dynamics, flywheels, governors
and gyroscopes, free and forced vibrations.
MF F266 Study Project 3
These courses include projects which are oriented towards read-
ings from published literature or books about new frontiers of
development or analysis of available database. These courses
are normally available to students in second or higher levels.
These courses must coterminate with project reports.
MF F311 Mechatronics & Automation 2 1 3
Mechatronics design approaches, interfacing, instrumentation
and control systems, modeling of mechanical and electrome-
chanical systems, sensors and actuators, introduction to auto-
mation, pneumatics and hydraulics in automation, pneumatic cir-
cuits for automation, PLC programming and interfacing with
pneumatic and hydraulic systems, introduction to MEMS, model-
ing and simulation of MEMS, CNC machines, automated materi-
al handling, introduction to FMS.
MF F312 Tool and Fixture Design 3 0 3
Tool-design methods, tool making practices, tooling materials
and heat treatment, design of cutting tools, gages and gage de-
sign, locating and clamping methods, design of drill jigs, design
of fixtures, design of sheet metal blanking and piercing dies, de-
sign of sheet metal bending, forming and drawing dies, using
plastics as tooling materials, tool design for numerically con-
trolled machine tools and automatic screw machines.
MF F313 Metal Forming and Machining 3 1 4
Plastic deformation of metals and related properties, metal form-
ing processes, Yield conditions and stress-strain relations, Theo-
ry of slip lines, upper and lower bound theorems, Analysis of var-
ious hot & cold metal forming processes, Mechanics of machin-
ing processes and analysis, thermal aspects and cutting fluids,
grinding and finishing operations, non conventional machining
processes.
MF F314 Design of Machine Elements 3 0 3
Design methodology, fundamental principles, materials, design
for static failure, design for fatigue failure, design and selection
of machine elements such as shafts, screw fasteners, welded
joints, springs, belt drive, brakes & clutches, bearings & gears.
Equivalent: ME F314
MF F315 Automation and Control 3 1 4
Types of automation and its elements, sensors and signal condi-
tioning, actuators; analog and digital systems, microprocessor /
microcontroller systems, Arduino and other microcontrollers,
communication systems, PLC, various case studies on mecha-
tronic systems. Modelling of system behavior, stability analysis
VI
using control theory, transfer function approach, frequency re-
sponse analysis (Nyquist and Bode plot), feedback control sys-
tems, various types of linear controller, tuning algorithms. Force
and motion controllers, state space approach, exposure to the
modelling and simulation tools.
MF F316 Machining and Machine Tools 3 1 4
Significance of machining and machine tools, cutting tool geom-
etry and materials, mechanics of machining processes, cutting
fluids and their properties; abrasive machining processes and
analysis, economics of machining, regulation of speed and feed
rates in machine tools, design of machine tool structures, guide-
ways, spindles; design of cutting tools for various machine tools;
jigs and fixtures.
MF F317 Computer Aided Design and Manufacturing 2 1 3
Overview of CAD/CAM, principles of computer aided design,
computer graphics fundamentals, 2D and 3D transformations
and projections, plane curves, space curves, synthetic curves,
analytical and parametric surfaces, synthetic surfaces, solid
modeling basics, constructive solid geometry (CSG), sweeping;
constructional aspects of computer controlled machines, CAM
system devices, programming of computer controlled machines,
CAD to CAM, virtual manufacturing, computer aided process
planning, computer aided production planning and control, com-
puter aided inspection, CIM.
MF F318 Nontraditional Manufacturing Processes 3 0 3
Mechanism and mechanics of cutting, process parametric analy-
sis, process capabilities, applications and limitations of various
nontraditional manufacturing processes (AJM, AFM, WJM, USM,
MAF, MRF, EDM, WEDM, PAM, LBM, EBM, FIBM, ECM, ECG,
ESD, etc.); introduction to micro and nanofabrication, micro
forming, micro-joining, characterization of micro-machined struc-
tures, additive manufacturing: algorithm, technologies and pro-
cesses such as SLA, FDM, SLS, LOM, DMLS, LENS, etc.; rapid
tooling; reverse engineering.
MF F319 Supply Chain Management 3 0 3
Cycle view and decision phases of supply chain, strategic fit &
scope, supply chain logistical and cross functional drivers, met-
rics of supply chain drivers, designing the distribution network,
planning demand and supply in supply chain, planning and
managing cycle inventory, safety inventory and optimum product
availability in a supply chain, transportation, sourcing and sus-
tainability.
MF F320 Engineering Optimization 3 0 3
Formulation of optimization problems, classical optimization
techniques, nonlinear optimization methods for problems with
and without constraints, simplex method, duality and sensitivity
concepts, revised simplex methods, transportation models, trav-
elling-salesman models, assignment models, network models,
integer programming, genetic algorithm and other evolutionary
optimization techniques, goal programming and multi-objective
optimization. Use of application softwares in solving optimization
problems.
Equivalent: ME F320
MF F321 Procurement Management 3 0 3
Procurement scope and development, strategic procurement
and supply chain management, outsourcing, quality manage-
ment, lead time and time compression, sourcing strategies and
relationships, price and total cost of ownership, negotiations,
project procurement, procurement of commodities, capital pro-
curement, retail procurement and efficient response, services
procurement, e-procurement systems, sustainability, perfor-
mance measurement, case studies.
MF F341 Design of Machine Tools 3 0 3
Determination of machining forces and power in turning, milling,
grinding, drilling and shaper. Kinematics of machine tools and
design of gearboxes, step-less regulation. Design of machine
tool guide ways, beds, tables and columns. Design of power
screws, spindle units and built-in inspection units. Bearings and
lubrication in machine tools. Electric and hydraulic systems of
machine tools. Introduction to dynamic analysis and vibrations in
machine tools. Micro-displacement in machine tools, Design of
CNC machines.
I-91
MF F342 Computer Aided Design 3 1 4
CAD software and CAD hardware. Mathematical modeling of
parametric curves, surfaces and solids, and their computer simu-
lation on spreadsheets and using specialized solid modeling
packages. CAD/CAM data exchange. Introduction to finite ele-
ment analysis and FEM practice on a specialized CAE package.
Rapid prototyping. Hands-on in assignments and CAD project.
MF F343 Casting and Welding 3 1 4
Casting processes, Pattern and Mould design, metal melting and
handling, metallurgical aspects of casting, Metal flow and heat
transfer, analysis of casting defects. Injection moulding of plas-
tics Gas cutting and welding processes including its physics,
chemistry and metallurgy, power source characteristics, different
welding techniques, selection of welding processes, destructive
and non destructive testing of weldments welding standards and
codes, analysis of welded joints, brazing and soldering.
MF F344 Engineering Optimization 2 0 2
Linear programming methods, simplex method, transportation
model and its variants, queuing systems, PERT/CPM, Optimal
problem formulation, engineering optimization problems, single
variable optimization algorithms, multivariable optimization algo-
rithms, constrained optimization algorithms.
MF F366 Lab Project 3
MF F367 Lab Project 3
These courses include projects involving laboratory investigation
or laboratory development in the students discipline or interdis-
ciplinary areas. These courses are normally available to stu-
dents in third or higher levels. These courses must coterminate
with project reports.
MF F376 Design Project 3
MF F377 Design Project 3
These courses are intended to impart training in design of prod-
uct/ process or other artifact to the students in the discipline or
interdisciplinary areas. These courses are normally available to
students in third or higher levels. These courses must cotermi-
nate with project reports.
MF F411 Fluid Power Systems 3 1 4
Introduction to Fluid power, advantages of fluid power, applica-
tions, Introduction to Pneumatics, Air preparation and Compo-
nents, Pneumatics Circuits and Applications, Electro pneumat-
ics, Electrical Controls for fluid power circuits, , Physical proper-
ties of hydraulic fluids, Energy and Power in Hydraulic Systems,
Frictional Losses in Hydraulic Pipelines, Hydraulic Pumps, Hy-
draulic Cylinders and Cushioning Devices, Hydraulic Motors,
Hydraulic Valves, Hydraulic Circuit Design and Analysis, Ancil-
lary Hydraulic Devices, Hydraulic Conductions and Fittings,
Maintenance of Hydraulic Systems, Use of PLC programming for
interfacing pneumatics and Hydraulic Circuits.
MF F412 Automotive Systems 3 0 3
Frame, suspension, springs and wheels, clutch and gear box,
propeller shaft, universal joint, final drive, differential and rear ax-
le, front axle and steering mechanism, brakes, automotive air
conditioning, electrical vehicles, automotive electrical systems,
automotive electronics systems.
MF F413 Mechanical Vibrations and Acoustics 3 0 3
Introduction, single degree-of-freedom systems: free and forced
vibration problems, concept of resonance and damping, vibration
isolation, multi-degree-of-freedom systems: modeling of multi-
degree-of freedom systems, eigen value problem and calculation
of normal modes of a system, forced response using modal su-
perposition techniques, introduction to acoustics - terminology
used in acoustics and definitive of fundamental quantities 1D
wave, equation (plane waves) & 3D wave equation, formulation
and fundamental solution to the equations, measurement of
noise & vibration – vibration measurement principles.
MF F414 Manufacturing Excellence 3 0 3
Introduction, frameworks of manufacturing excellence, practices
for manufacturing excellence: leadership and change manage-
ment, manufacturing strategy, innovative product planning, total
productive maintenance, total quality management, lean manu-
VI
facturing, customer relations management, green manufacturing,
supply chain management, knowledge management and social
responsibility.
MF F415 Noise Engineering 3 0 3
Fundamentals of vibrations, vibrations of strings and bars, vibra-
tions of membranes and plates, acoustic wave equation, acous-
tic energy and sound intensity, propagation of sound, concept of
acoustic impedance, sound power transmission, transmission
loss, human response and ratings, various measures of sound,
weighting filters, loudness, indices of loudness, acoustic radia-
tion from spherical source and piston source, acoustic sensors,
measuring techniques and instruments, octave filtering, sound
intensity measurement, intensity mapping, different types of
measurement environment and uses, response of beam sub-
jected to an acoustic plane wave, transmission loss of panels,
sound absorption coefficient, noise control measures in building,
reverberation time and auditorium design, industrial noise con-
trol, noise in machinery, traffic noise, vehicle noise, design of si-
lencers and mufflers, active noise control, duct noise control and
cabin noise control, practicals on noise measurements in differ-
ent situations.
MF F416 Work System Design 3 0 3
Introduction to work systems design, productivity and work
study, method study: process analysis, man-machine analysis,
operation analysis and micro-motion study, introduction to ergo-
nomics and principles of motion economy, work measurement:
stop watch time study, work sampling, standard data and prede-
termined motion time systems, job enlargement and job enrich-
ment, incentive schemes.
MF F418 Lean Manufacturing 3 0 3
Fundamentals of continuous improvement, value added and
waste elimination, elements of lean production: small lot produc-
tion, setup time reduction, maintaining and improving equipment,
pull production systems, focused factories and group technolo-
gies, work cells and cellular manufacturing, standard operations,
quality of design, systems for eliminating defects, simplified pro-
duction planning and control systems: scheduling for smooth
flow, synchronizing and balancing process, planning and control
in pull production, beyond the production systems: managing the
supply chain, activity based costing, performance measurement.
MF F421 Supply Chain Management 4
Customer driven strategies in production and distribution sys-
tems; Integrated production & distribution networks; SCM in the
context of JIT and MRP-II; Distribution Resource Planning; Man-
agement of dealer networks; Total Quality Control & product in-
novation across the supply chain; Incoming logistics & supplier
relationships; Value addition analysis; Metrics for management
of supply chain performance; Mathematical models and comput-
er assisted decision support for SCM; mathematical program-
ming for SCM.
MF F422 Supply Chain Modelling and Empirical Anal-3 1 4
ysis
Contexts, issues and challenges in supply chain modelling and
empirical analysis, buyer-supplier relationship, cultural implica-
tions, Primary and secondary data collection, questionnaire de-
sign, Model development and analysis with Statistical Packages
such as SMARTPLS3, SPSS, Hugin and AMOS, Value Stream
Mapping, Life Cycle Modelling, Model development and analysis
with OpenLCA and EVSM, cost benefit analysis, Digital supply
chain and Performance modelling, case studies
MF F442 Advances in Materials Science 3 0 3
Deformation of materials, deformation at high temperatures and
creep, recovery, recrystallization and grain growth, fracture of
materials and fatigue failure, deterioration of materials, corrosion
and oxidation, surface properties, surface energy and tribology,
polymers and fibre reinforced polymeric composites, mechanical
testings, nondestructive testing techniques.
MF F453 Industrial Relations 3 0 3
Introduction to human resources management; planning and or-
ganising human resources; leadership and motivation; job satis-
faction and morale; employee communication; audit and control;
I-92
procurement of personnel; performance appraisal; human re-
source development; wage and salary administration; job
change; discipline; labour welfare; trade unions and collective
bargaining; industrial disputes; worker participation in manage-
ment.
MF F463 Maintenance and Safety 3 0 3
Objectives, functions, and types of maintenance; defects due to
wear; lubrication and surfacing techniques to reduce wear;
maintenance of different equipments and their elements; spares
planning; overhauling; TPM; safety and safety management; en-
vironmental safety; chemical safety; occupational health man-
agement; control of major industrial hazards; managing emer-
gencies; employee participation in safety; HRD for maintenance
and safety.
MF F471 Instrumentation and Control 3 0 3
Measurement systems, transducers, feedback control, compo-
nents: electrical, hydraulic,pneumatic; Signal conditioning and
processing, controllers, display, recording, direct digital control,
programmable logic controllers, PC based instrumentation.
MF F472 Precision Engineering 3 0 3
Concept of accuracy, accuracy of numerical control systems,
tolerances and fits, acceptance tests for machine tools, static
stiffness and its influence on machining accuracy, inaccuracies
due to thermal effects, influence of forced vibrations on accura-
cy, dimensional wear of cutting tools and its influences on accu-
racy, clamping and setting errors, location principles and errors
due to location, surface roughness and microfinishing process-
es, dimensioning and dimensional chains, methods of improving
accuracy and surface finish, thread and gear measuring instru-
ments, coordinate measuring machines, introduction to comput-
er aided tolerancing.
MF F473 Product Design and Development 3 0 3
Introduction to product design and development, product devel-
opment planning and process tools, technical and business con-
cerns, understanding customer needs, function modeling,
benchmarking and engineering specifications, product architec-
ture, concept generation, concept selection, concept embodi-
ment, modeling of product metrics, design for X, physical proto-
types, physical models and experimentation, robust design.
MF F474 Product Design and Development Projects 3
The course will essentially deal with the practice of product de-
sign and development. The student will involve in the design and
development of different products. He will be guided by the in-
structor/resource person. The effort must culminate with a prod-
uct along with the project report.
MF F485 Sustainable Manufacturing 3 0 3
Overview of sustainable manufacturing, 6R, WEEE, triple bottom
concept of environment, economy and society, driver for, barri-
ers to and stakeholders of sustainable manufacturing and their
modelling, performance measures of sustainable manufacturing,
evaluation of manufacturing systems based on environmental
factors, eco-innovation and design for environment, recycling,
remanufacturing, reuse, strategic and operational evaluation of
technologies using life cycle management, environmental impact
assessment models, end-of-life strategies, reverse logistics, sus-
tainable product service systems, green factories.
MF F491 Special Project 3
This is an unstructured open-ended course where under the
overall supervision of an instructor-in-charge, batches of stu-
dents will be attached to different instructors. Each batch will
work on a specific time-bound project which is of basic or pe-
ripheral concern of his discipline. Each student must submit a
project report as a culmination of his endeavour and investiga-
tion. The instructor- in-charge will determine the choice of the
project and also whether or not the project report is to be submit-
ted jointly by a group or individually by a student. The course will
aim to evaluate student's actual ability to use the fundamentals
of knowledge and to meet new unknown situations as demon-
strated by the students' interaction with the instructors and in-
structor-in- charge and aggregated in the project report. The in-
structor-in- charge may assign specific hours for formal brain-
storming sessions.
VI
Management
MGTS F211 Principles of Management 3 0 3
Fundamental concepts of management - planning; organizing;
staffing; directing and controlling; production, financial, person-
nel, legal and marketing functions; accounting and budgeting,
balance sheets.
MGTS F311 Marketing 3 0 3
Marketing Management: An Introduction; Strategic Marketing
and marketing Plan; The Marketing Environment; Market re-
search; Building Customer satisfaction, Value and retention; An-
alyzing Consumer Markets; Industrial buyer behaviour; Seg-
menting and Targeting the Market; Analyzing Competition; Cre-
ating and managing brand equity; Positioning and differentiating
the market offering; Product strategy; Services marketing; Pric-
ing strategies and programmes; Designing and Managing Mar-
keting channels; Integrated marketing communications; Market-
ing mix and strategy.
MGTS F313 Product and Brand Management 3 0 3
Scope of product Policy Decisions; Product-Market strategy;
Product Life Cycle and Strategy; Managing Product Deletion;
Product Associations; Branding including aspects of brand name
selection; Brand Equity and its utilization for marketing decision
making; Brand Extension: use for brand names for launching
new products; Managing new product development: New prod-
uct development process; Idea Generation and Screening; Con-
cept Development and Evaluation; Product Design and Testing;
Market planning; Testing the market plan; Marketing research
process; Adoption and Diffusion of products; Organizing for a
new and existing product.
MGTS F314 Essentials of Financial Management 3 0 3
Overview and introduction to financial management, Basic prin-
ciples of financial management, Introduction to financial mar-
kets, Key financial statements, Financial statements analysis
(horizontal, vertical, and ratio analysis), Time value of money
and its applications, Bond valuation, Stock valuation, Introduc-
tion to risk and return, Types of risk, Introduction to Risk Man-
agement, Break even analysis, Cost of capital (basic concepts,
relevance and importance to business decisions), CAPM model,
Weighted Average cost of capital (WACC), Capital budgeting,
Financial forecasting, Sensitivity Analysis, Scenario Analysis,
Working capital management, Capital structure and dividend
policy, Introduction to corporate governance, Introduction to de-
rivatives, international finance.
MGTS F315 Foundations of Business Analytics 3 0 3
Introduction to Business Analytics, Analytics on Spreadsheet,
Visualizing and Exploring Data, Descriptive Statistical Measures,
Probability Distribution and Data Modelling, Sampling and Esti-
mation, Statistical Inference, Trending and Regression Analysis,
Forecasting Techniques, Introduction to Data Mining, Spread-
sheet Modelling and Analysis, Monte Carlo Simulation and Risk
Analysis, Linear Optimization, Integer Optimization, Decision
Analysis.
MGTS F316 Managerial and Leadership Skills 3 0 3
Role of a Manager and a Leader; Ethics and Integrity; Trust &
Commitment; Emotional Intelligence; Networking Skills; Decision
Making; Vision and setting goals; Team Building; Delegation;
Basics of Supervision; Communication Skills - Effect speaking,
Listening, Presentation, Persuasion; How to Handle Meetings;
Negotiation Skills & Techniques; Interviewing Skills; Process of
Induction; Training and Development; Mentoring & Coaching,
How to Appraise Employees; Managing Change; Grievance
Handling; Time management; Work Life Balance; Stress Man-
agement.
MGTS F351 Organisational Behaviour n 3 0 3
A new perspective of management; conceptual model of organi-
zation behavior; the individualprocesses- personality, work atti-
tude, perception, attribution, motivation, learning and reinforce-
ment, work stress and stress management; the dynamics of or-
ganizational behavior- group dynamics, power & politics, conflict
& negotiation, leadership process & styles, communication; the
organizational processes- decision making, job design; organiza-
tional theory and design, organizational culture, managing cul-
I-93
tural diversity; organizational change & development.
MGTS F433 Advertising and Sales Promotion 3 0 3
The communication process and models of persuasive commu-
nication; advertising research; advertising campaign compo-
nents; advertising campaign planning; advertising/media scene;
media concepts; media planning & strategy; advertising cam-
paign planning, execution and evaluation; advertising agencies;
sales promotion types and techniques; sales promotion strategy;
measuring the effectiveness of the promotional program; regula-
tions of advertising and promotion; Extending marketing com-
munication to social communication, personal selling, interna-
tional advertising, interactive advertising, advertising laws, so-
cial, ethical and moral issues.
MGTS G511 Advanced Marketing Theories and Adver- 5
tisement
Strategic planning, theory and methods with emphasis on cus-
tomer, competitor industry and environmental analysis and its
application to strategy development and choice. Marketing
communication through advertising and related mass media and
promotion campaigns and its influence on market and other or-
ganisation. Globalisation and marketing aspects.
MGTS G513 Public Programme Evaluation 5
Value judgements & public choice, social welfare-Paretion Wel-
fare Economics; market system, income distribution and gov-
ernment & the market. social cost benefit Analysis
(SCBA):SCBA and public sector investment planning, efficiency
pricing & the rational of new methodology, problems of pricing
comparative advantage, social pricing; the application SCBA:
economic pricing of factor of production, social pricing, distribu-
tion & public sector; management values of public sector under-
takings.
MGTS G521 Business Policy-Structure and Organisa-5
tion
Frame-work of business dynamics; missions; objective and
goals; social aspects of business policy; environmental analysis;
the dynamic setting of business policy; internal analysis of re-
sources - strength and weaknesses; strategic planning choice,
implementation and evaluation; functional policies; orientation in
special cases - MNC's high-tech companies, non-profit organisa-
tions etc.
MGTS G531 Recent Advances in Organisation Behav-5
iour Theory
Emerging challenges of human resource management- a futuris-
tic perspective; unified global theory of management; empower-
ment; employeeship; entrepreneurship; organisation diagnosis
and development; social system and organisational culture-both
in the national and global context interpersonal and group dy-
namics; employee attitudes; leadership and decision making;
motivating employees; quality of work life and socio - technical
systems; dealing with subordinates, boss, peers, problem em-
ployees.
MGTS G541 Management Information and Decision 5
Support Systems
Data & information; characteristics of information; components of
management information systems; information flows; design and
maintenance of management information systems; decision
support systems.
MGTS G551 Frontiers in Financial Management 5
MGTS G561 Institutional Finance and Project Ap- 5
praisal
Mobilization of funds internally, externally, financial institutions
and international financial institutions, financial and monetary
framework of international financial management, foreign ex-
change markets and negotiations, project definition, preparation
of feasibility assessment and selection, project reporting, con-
ventional project appraisal - limitations, towards a new frame-
work.
Public Health
MPH G510 Biostatistics & Computers in Public Health 5
Introduction to data classification, analysis and probability; statis-
tical inference – estimation and hypothesis testing; linear regres-
VI
sion and correlation; design of experiments; analysis of variance;
non parametric procedures & tests; statistical quality control; ex-
perimental design in clinical trials and validation; basic tech-
niques in optimization.
Introduction to computer and its component, operating systems;
principles and use of standard software packages having appli-
cation in drug design, development, analysis, etc; principles of
software creation; processing concepts, flow charting and algo-
rithms, programming constructs, programming languages, pro-
gram development sequence; information systems; need, signif-
icance concepts, their analysis, design and implementation;
software life cycle with special reference to software planning
and maintenance.
MPH G512 Environmental & Occupational Health 4
Introduction to environmental health and its importance; pollution
from water, air, automobile, chemicals used in agricultural sector
and their implication on health and environment; techniques for
studying, monitoring and controlling pollution; handling and dis-
posal of domestic industrial and bio-medical refuse, incineration
of waste materials; methods of vector control; effect of low fre-
quency electromagnetic radiation and nuclear radiation on public
health, occupational health hazards; disaster management.
MPH G513 Public Health & Diseases 4
Tropical diseases – their geography, identification, treatment
methods, medicines, design of standard protocols and immun-
ization processes including planning and execution; infections
due to ticks and mites; bacterial, parasitic and viral infections-
types and their classification, host–parasite relationships, their
mode of proliferation, mechanisms of infestation, carriers, pre-
ventive methods and processes; understanding the public health
problems related TB, AIDS, leprosy, GI infections and other
communicable diseases.
MPH G515 Communication in Health Care 4
Role and importance of communication; effectiveness in oral and
written communication; technical reports; technical proposals;
research papers, interpersonal communication; business corre-
spondence; use of modern communication aids and mass me-
dia; behavioral change communication; design, management &
evaluation of IEC.
MPH G521 Health Care Management 4
Basis of organizational culture and management techniques for
efficient administration of health delivery; general principles of
HR, materials and operation management; understanding the
organizational culture that exists in public, private and non-Govt.
sector agencies; management information system.
MPH G522 Preventive Nutrition & Health Promotion 4
Basic concepts; nutritional requirements of essential nutrients,
proteins, fats, carbohydrates, vitamins and minerals; balanced
diet; nutritional problems in public health; nutritional factors in
selected diseases; assessment of nutritional status; nutritional
surveillance; mal-nutrition; special nutritional programme.
MPH G523 Epidemic & Disaster Management 4
Disaster management; impact and response; relief phase; disas-
ter mitigation in health sector; disaster preparedness; policy de-
velopment; man-made disasters; international agencies provid-
ing health based humanitarian assistance; and strategies for
disaster management.
MPH G531 Health Economics & Financial Manage-4
ment
Concepts & methods of economic analysis related to health sys-
tem; organization and policy; demand and supply of scarce re-
source for health care; health financing & population coverage;
determinants of cost & utilization; health insurance; cost-benefit
analysis; costing for decision making; fundamentals of account-
ing; financial statement analysis; budget process & budgetary
control; capital investment decision.
MPH G535 Family & Community Health Measures 4
Community-level indicators (CLI) measure aspects of the physi-
cal, legal, social and economic environment that reflect and are
likely to influence the attitudes and behavior of individuals and
community members. They also measure an important step in
I-94
community-based health promotion interventions, Topics like, ru-
ral health services and health sector reforms from community
perspective.
MPH G537 Law & Ethics in Public Health 3
Various Acts/ legislations/ rules pertaining to public health and
related fields like, drug & pharmaceuticals, medical practice,
PNDT, CPCSEA, IHEC, Regulations related to waste disposal.
MPH G538 Telemedicine 3
Advancing the use of digital telecommunications technology for
the purpose of improving health care delivery to rural and under-
served remote populations. Service areas include clinical ser-
vices, educational programs, and research and development to
provide high quality specialty care in participating rural communi-
ties and evaluation of the clinical utility and cost impact of tele-
medicine. Topic included will be Introduction to Telemedicine,
Telehealth, Telemedicine Services, Telemedicine Systems and
Telecommunications, Telemedicine Applications, Benefits and
Drawbacks of Telemedicine, Information Sources, Advancing
Telemedicine, etc.
MPH G539 Inter-sectoral co-ordination in Health Ser-3
vices
Roles of public, private, government, non-government sectors in
providing health services, Public works department, Sanitation,
Waste disposal and management, Water and air pollution moni-
toring and control, Deforestation, Urbanization and rural devel-
opment, Employment and occupational health hazards, Training
of administrators and enforcement agency staff, Public aware-
ness programs, etc.
MPH G540 Role of Voluntary bodies/ NGO’s in Public 3
Health
Civil society organizations, Red Cross, Red Crescent movement
and nongovernmental organizations in fund raising, international
and local humanitarian responses, partnerships and collabora-
tions with civil society, Operations in remote areas and marginal-
ized groups; Role of indigenous voluntary bodies, Functioning of
NGOs, WHO in preparedness and response efforts and Needs-
based deployment of available resources, Effective health ser-
vices coordination, etc.
MPH G613 Health Systems and Society 2
Introduction to health systems; functions of health systems;
managing health systems; problems of health systems man-
agement; Major environmental health problems including quality
of water, waste disposal food production and processing, vector
control etc. Air pollution and its controlling, Hazards of radiation,
municipal and other wastes, Occupational health hazards.
MPH G661 Research Methodology I 5
Course description is same as given under SKILL G661.
MPH G665 Hospital Operations Management 3
Operation Management aspects connected with outpatient ward,
casualty, operation theatres, diagnostic laboratories, pathology
laboratories, pharmacy diet and nutrition, blood bank, laundry,
medical records, security, scheduling and deployment of doc-
tors, nurses and other staff, accounts among others. The course
will involve on site visits in a hospital, discussions and presenta-
tions on the practical aspects of hospital operations manage-
ment.
MPH G681 Strategic Management 3
Concepts of Strategic Planning; Environment Analysis; Internal
and External; Resource Analysis; Organizational Structure and
Linkage with Strategies, Formulation, Implementation and Con-
trol of Strategic Plan; Communicating Strategic Plan; Case stud-
ies.
MPH G692 Epidemiology 2
Introduction to the principles and methods of epidemiology. Epi-
demiology of some illustrative infectious diseases (of bacterial,
rickettsial and viral origins), sexually transmitted diseases,
chronic diseases such as cancer, cardiovascular diseases, neu-
rological disorders etc. Use of biostatistics in epidemiology.
VI
Manufacturing Systems Engineering
MSE G511 Mechatronics 3 2 5
Concepts of measurement of electrical and non-electrical pa-
rameters; displacement, force, pressure etc. and related signal
conditioning techniques, drives and actuators, concepts of mi-
croprocessors/ microcontrollers architecture and programming,
memory and I/O interfacing. System design concepts through
case studies.
MSE G512 Manufacturing Planning and Control 4
Introduction, operations and manufacturing strategy for competi-
tive advantage, product design and planning, forecasting product
demand, facilities location, process selection and design, capaci-
ty planning, layout of facilities, job design and work measure-
ment, aggregate planning, master manufacturing schedules, ma-
terial requirements planning for dependent demand, short-term
schedules and shop floor control, independent demand inventory
systems, logistics and supply chain management, just-in-time
systems, maintenance and reliability, quality management, man-
aging projects, strategies for manufacturing excellence.
MSE G513 Maintenance Engineering 3 1 4
Introduction, maintenance systems, methods and tools of
maintenance analysis, eliability and safety, maintainability, sup-
portability, design for maintenance, maintenance integration,
computerized maintenance management systems, TPM, world-
class maintenance systems, and maintenance effectiveness and
performance evaluation.
MSE G514 Leadership and Managing Change 3 1 4
Individuals as leaders, team leadership and organizational lead-
ership. Introduction to managing change, management of
change : organisational structure, culture, recruitment, perfor-
mance management, human resource development, reward
management, employee relations and involvement, downsizing,
and evaluating and promoting.
MSE G521 World-Class Manufacturing 3 2 5
The world-class manufacturing challenge, developing a world-
class manufacturing strategy, just-in-time, total quality, total em-
ployee envolvement, world-class information systems, managing
the change, methods and procedures; improved brainstorming
methods, using the check-total quality - the first steps, getting
people involved, monitoring world-class performance.
MSE G531 Concurrent Engineering 3 2 5
Introduction of concurrent engineering and need, concurrent en-
gineering tools, advances in design and manufacturing engineer-
ing, design for manufacture, design for assembly, rapid prototyp-
ing, simulation, concurrent approaches to design, manufacturing
and other aspects of engineering.
Materials Science and Technology
MST F331 Materials Characterization 3 1 4
Thermal properties of Materials and Characterization, Electrical
Characterization: Temperature dependent DC conductivity in
materials, impedance spectroscopy, Characterization instru-
ments like impedance analyzer, Optical Characterization: UV-
Visible spectroscopy, FTIR spectroscopy, optical microscopy,
Confocal microscopy, Mechanical Characterization: Time de-
pendent and time independent mechanical behavior of materials,
Dynamic Mechanical Analysis, Instruments:Universal testing
machine, Fatigue machine, Izod and charpy impact testers,
Hardness indenters, Abrasion tester, Physical Characterization:
Microstructure Characterization, Characterization instruments:
SEM, TEM, X-ray diffractometer, AFM, Rheological Characteri-
zation: Linear and non-linear visco-elastic behavior of materials.
Magnetic Characterization: Basics of diamagnetism, ferromag-
netism and paramagnetism, anti ferromagnetism and ferrimag-
netism, hysteresis and anisotropy, AC susceptibility and SQUID
magnetometer.
MST F332 Materials Processing 3 0 3
Processing of metals: electrometallurgy, hydrometallurgy, pyro-
metallurgy, extraction, and refining, Powder processing of metals
and ceramics: Powder handling, compaction and forming tech-
niques. Drying, burnout, densification, sintering, and grain
growth in powder compacts. Crystal growth, epitaxial growth,
I-95
Deposition of thin films – Plasma Laser deposition, metal organic
chemical vapour deposition, Production of carbon-based materi-
als: Controlled pyrolysis, electro-spinning.
Processing of plastics and fiber reinforced plastics: Processing
by using techniques such as extrusion, injection molding, com-
pression molding, SMC, pultrusion and filament winding.
MST F333 Introduction to Biomaterials 3 0 3
Proteins, polysaccharides, oils and fats, fibers and biopolymers,
structure and characterization of biomaterials, isolation and pro-
cessing of biomaterials, development of polymers and compo-
sites from biomaterials, structure-property relationships (thermal,
mechanical, biocompatibility, biodegradation etc.). Value-added
products developed by using biomaterials, adhesives, bioplas-
tics, composites for insulation and construction applications, bi-
omedical applications such as, dental implants, sutures etc.,
MST F334 Materials for Catalytic applications 3 0 3
Classification of different industrial catalysis technology; Classifi-
cation of solid catalysts; Synthesis of bulk and nanomaterials;
Chemical properties of energy-relevant materials environmental
catalytic materials at the nanoscale.; Metals and metallic alloys
supported on oxide-based catalytic materials; Metal-support in-
teraction; Structure sensitivity of catalytic reactions; Reaction
mechanisms in catalysis on metal supported catalysts; Porous
materials for catalyst supports; Oxide non-stoichiometry - struc-
tural defects; Semiconductor character - photocatalysts; Acidic
and Basic oxide catalysts; Lewis and Brønsted acidity in oxides;
Hydrotalcites - precursors for base oxides; Sulfide based cata-
lysts.
MST F335 Coating and Thin film technology 3 0 3
Coating composition, pigments, binders, solvents, additives, In-
dustrial process of making coatings, Rheology and mechanical
properties of coatings, coatings in building and automotive sec-
tor, Introduction and formation of thin films by processes such as
CVD, PVD, electrochemical deposition, thermal sprays, etc.
Characterization of thin films such as coating hardness, thick-
ness, assessment of friction & wear, roughness using nano-
scale tests. Applications such as in defense, solar energy, con-
sumer goods and implant materials.
MST F336 Glass Technology 3 0 3
Introduction to glass, glass transition, principles of glass for-
mation and molecular structure of glass. Structural basis for
glass formation. Characterization of properties of Glass. Glass
making: Raw materials and mixing methods, batch wetting and
compaction techniques. Glass batch melting reactions and prin-
ciples. Glass technology and commercial glasses: Press and
blow, Individual selection machines, molds, and container de-
sign. Surface treatments and chemical durability. Flat glass
forming and fabrication. Fabrication processes: chemical
strengthening, annealing, tempering, and laminating. Strength-
ening of glass by physical and chemical means. Gorilla glass.
Fiber glass manufacturing methods and products for application
in insulation, filtration, polymer reinforcement and textiles.
MST F337 Materials for Energy Applications 3 0 3
Overview of conventional and non- conventional energy re-
sources, Silicon based Photovoltaic Solar cells, Photovoltaic thin
films, Lightweight composites for wind turbine blades, Metals
and ceramics used in thermal power plants, Ceramics for Energy
storage and conversion, Ceramics and Composites for Nuclear
energy, Photoelectrochemical Cells for hydrogen generation,
Functional materials for Hydrogen storage, Functional Materials
for fuel cells, Membrane electrode assemblies for fuel cells in-
cluding DMFC’s, Novel materials for Solid oxide fuel cells
(SOFC) systems.
MST F338 Metals and Alloys 3 0 3
Introduction, classification of Ferrous metals, Non-ferrous metals
such as Titanium, Aluminium, Magnesium, Copper and their al-
loys, Structure-property relationship, Phase diagrams and Phase
kinetics, processing and applications of metals and alloys, deg-
radation of metals, Applications in transportation, chemical and
medical sectors.
MST F339 Polymer Materials 3 0 3
Polymerization techniques; classification of polymers; mecha-
VI
nism and kinetics of formation of polymers; Theoretical and ex-
perimental techniques for determination of different types of mo-
lecular weights and molecular weight distributions; polymer solu-
tion viscosity; melting and glass transitions, rheology; polymeri-
zation techniques used in industry, polymer solution thermody-
namics; viscoelastic behaviour; degradation and stability; poly-
mer processing and applications. Engineering thermoplastics,
additives, blends, polymer composites and Biopolymers. Appli-
cations in automobile, biomedical and electronic and other in-
dustries.
MST G511 Nondestructive Testing Techniques 3 2 5
Ultrasonic testing, X-radiography, eddycurrent testing, magnetic
methods of crack detection, liquid penetrant inspection, acoustic
emission and acousto-ultrasonic testing techniques.
MST G512 Ceramics Technology 3 2 5
Ceramic raw materials, their beneficiations and characterisa-
tions; crystal structure of important ceramic systems and struc-
tural defects; various types of ceramics; white wares, glasses,
refractories, cements, abrasives, glass-ceramic, ceramic coat-
ings, electronic ceramics; fabrication processes; grinding, press-
ing, slip casting, drying, sintering, glass blowing; development of
ceramic microstructures; properties of ceramic materials; me-
chanical, thermal, electrical, optical, magnetic and chemical; ce-
ramic composites, cermets.
MST G521 Materials Characterization Techniques 3 2 5
Materials characterisation - definition; importance and applica-
tion with case studies, principles and general methods of com-
positional, structural and defect characterisation, techniques of
X-ray, electron and neutron diffraction, EDAX, thermal methods -
DTA, TGA, DSC. TMA and DMA; microscopy-optical, electron
(TEM & SEM) and spectroscopy -UV, visible, IR and Raman
spectroscopy, ESCA and Auger spectroscopy, SIMS resonance
method- NMR, ESR, Mossbauer techniques, particle size analy-
sis, electrical and magnetic characterization techniques.
MST G522 Advanced Composites 3 2 5
Definition of composite materials; classification; particulates and
dispersion hardened composites, continuous and discontinuous
fibre reinforced composites, metal-matrix composites, carbon-
carbon composites, molecular composites, micro and multilayer
composites, theory of reinforcement; reinforcement by continu-
ous and discontinuous fibres, concept of microfibril; effect of ori-
entation and adhesion; mechanical behaviour of composites,
stress-strain relationship, strength, fracture thoughness and fa-
tigue; properties of fibre reinforcement and production technolo-
gy of composites.
MST G531 Experimental Stress Analysis Techniques 3 2 5
Strain gauges, photoelasticity, brittle lacquer, three dimensional
photoelasticity, Moire methods.
MST G532 Electronic Materials 3 2 5
Electrical conduction in glasses and ceramics, non-stoichiometry
and valence controlled conduction, ceramic heating elements,
fast ion conductors, superconducting materials and devices, die-
lectric ceramics, ceramics in micro electronics, voltage depend-
ent resistors, positive and negative temperature coefficient resis-
tors. Piezo electric, pyroelectric, ferroelectric and electrooptic ce-
ramic materials and devices, ceramic sensors, magnetic and
magneto-optic ceramic devices, ceramics for microwave applica-
tions, luminescent and photoconducting ceramics, light transmit-
ting filters, IR transmitting glass, optical fibre technology.
Music
MUSIC N103T Indian Classical Music (Vocal) I 3*
MUSIC N104T Indian Classical Music (Vocal) II 3*
MUSIC N203T Indian Classical Music (Vocal) III 3*
MUSIC N204T Indian Classical Music (Vocal) IV 3*
MUSIC N111T Hindi Classical Music (Instrumental) I 3*
MUSIC N112T Hindi Classical Music (Instrumental) II 3*
MUSIC N113T Indian Classical Music (Instrumental) I 3*
MUSIC N114T Indian Classical Music (Instrumental) II 3*
MUSIC N213T Indian Classical Music (Instrumental) III 3*
I-96
MUSIC N214T Indian Classical Music (Instrumental) IV 3*
The eight courses given above – four in vocal and four in instru-
mental - are designed to give theoretical and practical
knowledge of Indian Classical Music in Hindustani or Carnatic
style.
In the Hindustani series, the student will be introduced to the
Hindustani system, swaragyan, structure of Raags and Taals,
the ten Thaats, and practice in performing selected raags
through compositions with elaborations.
For the Carnatic style series, the syllabus includes basic Swara
gyana, structure of Raagas and Taalas, renderings of graded
compositions in the form of Geetam, Swarajati,Varnam and
Keertanam, introduction to the Melakarta and JanyaRaaga sys-
tem with reference to the seventy two Melakartas, performance
practice including compositions and elaborations.
These courses are not available for fulfilling the requirements of
any programme in the institute and can be taken only as audit
courses.
MUSIC N105T Western Classical Music I 3*
MUSIC N106T Western Classical Music II 3*
MUSIC N205T Western Classical Music III 3*
MUSIC N206T Western Classical Music IV 3*
The above four courses are designed to introduce and train the
student in notation, rhythmic concepts and practice of western
classical music.
The beginning level will develop the skills of reading and writing
notations, supported by singing exercises. The objective of the
theory part is to impart the required skills for reading music while
either playing an instrument or plain vocal. Thestudent will be
trained further in keyboard or violin practice.
At the advanced level, the student will be trained in more com-
plex notations, rhythms, concept of Harmony melody etc., and
composing rhythms and melodies. Training syllabus and exami-
nation tests will be based on that of the Associated Board of the
Royal Schools of Music, London, and/or the Trinity-Guildhall
board of music examinations.
(These courses are not available for fulfilling the requirements of
any programme in the institute and can be taken only on audit).
MUSIC N303T Advanced Indian Music Practice (Vocal) 0
MUSIC N313T Advanced Indian Music Practice (In-0
strumental)
These courses are designed to allow facilities for practice with
minimum supervision for students who have satisfactorily com-
pleted MUSIC N204T or MUSIC N214T respectively. These
courses carry zero units. A student who has met the prerequisite
can take these courses as audit courses as many times as he
needs.
Pharmacy
PHA F211 Pharmaceutical Analysis 2 1 3
Basic techniques of pharmaceutical analysis, data handling and
analysis, sources of error in analysis. The analytical methods
would comprise of various titrimetric methods, such as acid-
base, complexometric, non-aqueous, oxidation-reduction, pre-
cipitation, conductometric; physical and instrumental analysis
such as gravimetric, polarography, nephelometry, amperometry,
turbidometry, potentiometry; chromatographic separations such
as TLC, coloumn, ion-exchange,
extraction methods such as gel-filtration, fractionation process-
es, analysis of metallic and non-metallic elements; water con-
tent, as well as evaluation of drug constituents in various phar-
maceutical preparation.
PHA F212 Dispensing Pharmacy 2 1 3
Prescriptions, principles involved in the dispensing of prescrip-
tions; physical, chemical and therapeutic incompatibilities in-
volved and their remedy in such prescriptions; techniques in-
volved in dispensing of mixtures. ENT preparations, parenteral
products, radiopharmaceuticals, etc.
VI
PHA F213 Microbiology 2 1 3
Introduction and classification of microbes; structure and physi-
ology of microbial cell; infection and immunity; host parasite rela-
tionship; microbiology of milk, air, water and food; physical and
chemical methods of controlling microbes; experiments for isola-
tion, cultivation, physiological and biochemical characterization
of microbes.
PHA F214 Anatomy Physiology & Hygiene 2 1 3
Anatomical study of the important organs of human body; physi-
ology of various functional systems of human body; general
principles of personal and community hygiene and prevention of
communicable diseases.
PHA F215 Introduction to Molecular Biology & Immu-3 0 3
nology
Basic aspects of cell and molecular biology, DNA replication,
transcription, translation and control mechanisms of protein syn-
thesis. Post transcriptional modifications and post-translational
modifications, DNA-protein interactions and regulation of gene
expression. Cell signalling. Regulation of cell cycle. Basic as-
pects of immune system, cell-mediated and humoral immunity.
PHA F216 Pharmaceutical Formulations I 2 1 3
Prescriptions; understanding commonly used terminologies in a
prescription; principles involved in the dispensing of prescrip-
tions; labelling; posology; pharmaceutical calculations; physical,
chemical and therapeutic incompatibilities; types of dosage
forms; additives employed in dispensed preparations; 'tech-
niques involved in preparation, packaging, quality control and
stability of various preparations including liquid preparations (so-
lutions, emulsion, suspensions, mixtures, elixirs, etc.), semi-solid
preparations (creams, ointments, pastes, etc.), suppositories,
powders, sterile liquids like ophthalmic drops and parenteral so-
lutions etc.
PHA F217 Pharmaceutical Microbiology 2 1 3
Introduction and classification of microbes; structure and physi-
ology of microbial cell; bacterial growth and nutritional require-
ment; isolation and preservation methods for pure cultures; steri-
lization techniques and its evaluation; microbial genomics and
genetic exchange; infection and immunity; microbial diseases;
antimicrobial drugs; production of antibiotics and vaccines etc.
PHA F241 Pharmaceutical Chemistry 2 1 3
This course deals with study of important classes of organic
compounds such as alcohols, ethers, esters, aldehydes etc and
their reactions. The mechanisms for various reactions will also
be dealt with to comprehensively cover the basics of chemical
reactions. Some important five and six member heterocycles
with their reactions will also be part of the course. This course
also emphasizes the use of inorganic compounds in pharmacy.
PHA F242 Biological Chemistry 2 1 3
This course focuses upon the physiological and medical signifi-
cance of important biomolecules along with their use as drug
targets. The course also elaborates the role of vitamins as pros-
thetic groups of enzymes and enzyme kinetics and regulation.
The course deals with the understanding of chemical structures,
biochemical reactions metabolic pathways related to carbohy-
drates, lipids, nucleic acids and protein synthesis and diseases
arising from defects in these pathways.
PHA F243 Industrial Pharmacy 2 1 3
Pharmaceutical processes and equipments commonly used in
pharmaceutical industries; drug extraction and clarification; mix-
ing and granulation; pharmaceutical preparations such as aro-
matic waters, spirits, syrups, elixirs, lotions, liniments, official so-
lutions, etc.; galenical products like infusions, decoctions, tinc-
tures, extracts, etc, glandular preparations and blood plasma
substitutes.
PHA F244 Physical Pharmacy 2 1 3
Preformulation characterization including solid state pharmaceu-
tics, crystallinity, solubility, micromeritics, drug stability and com-
patibility, reaction kinetics, rheology, interfacial phenomenon,
principles of diffusion and dissolution. Different types of colloidal
systems and their properties and complexation.
I-97
PHA F266 Study Project 3
These courses include projects which are oriented towards read-
ings from published literature or books about new frontiers of
development or analysis of available database. These courses
are normally available to students in second or higher levels.
These courses must coterminate with project reports.
PHA F311 Pharmacology I 2 1 3
This course is intended to impart the knowledge regarding the
sources, routes of drug administration, pharmacokinetics (AD-
ME) and pharmacodynamics (mechanism of action) of various
drugs. This course is also intended to impart the knowledge re-
garding the concepts of action of drugs on various systems of
the human body including ANS, SNS and CNS. The course also
deals with therapeutic uses, side effects and contraindications of
the drugs, which are commonly prescribed for the treatment of
various disease conditions.
PHA F312 Medicinal Chemistry I 2 1 3
Study of important classes of drugs predominantly acting on
CNS, ANS, SNS. Structure, properties, therapeutic and pharma-
ceutical importance and the uses of drug molecules both of natu-
ral and synthetic origin. Study of physiochemical properties,
mechanism of action, S.A.R. and metabolism, factors affecting
metabolism of drugs. Special emphasis on important topics such
as Cholinergic drugs, Adrenergic drugs, Local anaesthetics and
general anaesthetics, Sedatives, hypnotics and anti-anxiety
drugs, Antiepileptics, Antihistamines, NSAIDS, Thyroid and An-
tithyroid Drugs, Drugs for Erectile Dysfunction.
PHA F313 Instrumental Methods of Analysis 2 1 4
Principle, configuration, applications of instruments like mass
spectrophotometer, NMR, UV, IR, X-ray apparatus, atomic ab-
sorption/emission spectrophotometer, chromatographic tech-
niques such as gas, HPLC, HPTLC, ion exchange, gel, affinity,
high voltage electrophoresis, DTA, DSC, TGA, etc.
The course is specially designed for students in the first degree
majoring in experimental sciences and would require groups of
students to work with the above instruments in order to appreci-
ate the potentiality of such modern instrumental methods of
analysis.
PHA F314 Pharmaceutical Formulations and Bio- 2 1 3
pharmaceutics
Physical, chemical and biopharmaceutical considerations in for-
mulations, absorption, distribution and elimination of drugs;
pharmaceutical additives; formulation and stability aspects of
solid dosage forms, semi-solid dosage forms and liquids dosage
forms; sustained release medication; aerosol products and
packaging.
PHA F315 Pharmaceutical Formulations II 2 1 3
Physical, chemical and biopharmaceutical considerations in for-
mulations, absorption, distribution and elimination of drugs;
pharmaceutical additives; formulation, manufacturing, packag-
ing, quality control and stability of solid dosage forms, semi-solid
dosage forms, liquids dosage forms, and sterile preparations in-
cluding parenteral suspensions, emulsions, depot formulations;
microencapsulation and controlled release formulations; targeted
drug delivery systems; multi-unit particulate systems; transder-
mal, gastroretentive, and nasopulmonary drug delivery systems;
aerosol products and packaging.
Pre-requisite:
PHA F216: Pharmaceutical Formulations I
PHA F316 Pharmaceutical Regulatory Science 3 0 3
Fundamental knowledge on the regulatory requirements for ap-
proval of new drugs, and drug products in regulated markets of
India & other countries like US, EU, Japan, Australia, UK, etc.
Regulatory documentation requirements and registration proce-
dures for marketing the drug products in these countries.
PHA F317 Safety Pharmacology and Toxicology 3 0 3
Introduction to toxicological principles, their role in new drug de-
sign and development, toxicokinetics, various influencers that
give rise to mutagenesis, teratogenesis, carcinogenesis includ-
ing developmental toxicity, organ toxicity with special reference
to hepatic, renal, cardiovascular and neurological systems would
VI
be covered. ICH, OECD guidelines on toxicity studies, their im-
portance in pre-clinical drug development.
Pre-requisite:
PHA F311 : Pharmacology I
PHA F341 Pharmacology II 2 1 3
This course is intended to impart the knowledge regarding the
concepts of actions of drugs on various systems of the human
body including cardiovascular system, urinogenital system, res-
piratory system, gastrointestinal and endocrine system etc. The
course also imparts the knowledge regarding the mechanisms of
action of various antimicrobial agents in the treatment and pre-
vention of various diseases caused by the bacteria, fungi viruses
and parasites. The course also deals with the drug-drug interac-
tions, therapeutic uses, side effects and contraindications of the
drugs, which are commonly prescribed for the treatment of vari-
ous disease conditions.
PHA F342 Medicinal Chemistry II 2 1 3
This course deals with the study of important classes of drugs.
Various aspects like structure, properties, therapeutic and phar-
maceutical importance, mechanism of action, S.A.R. and me-
tabolism of drugs and the uses of drug molecules both of natural
and synthetic origin will be covered. Special emphasis will be
given to topics such as Anti-hypertensive drugs, Anti-diabetic
drugs, Steroids and steroidal drugs, Antimalarial drugs, Anti-
cancer agents, Antiviral agents, Antiprotozoals, Antihelmintics,
etc. Concepts of QSAR approach to drug design, molecular
modelling, and combinatorial chemistry will also be discussed in
addition. Principles of Toxicology.
PHA F343 Forensic Pharmacy 2 - 2
A study of the professional pharmacist's relation to the public
and to other professions; a critical survey of statutory regulations
governing the practice of pharmacy and drug industry in all its
aspects; history and ethics of the profession of pharmacy.
PHA F344 Natural Drugs 2 1 3
The course imparts a knowledge of the crude drugs of natural
origin used in pharmaceutical and medical practice. Study will
include the different systems of classifications of crude drugs;
cell contents; general principles of cultivation, collection, drying,
storage and commerce of natural products of current medical
and pharmaceutical importance; their morphologial and micro-
scopical study: use and knowledge of common substitutes and
adulterants.
PHA F366 Lab Project 3
PHA F367 Lab Project 3
These courses include projects involving laboratory investigation
or laboratory development in the students discipline or interdis-
ciplinary areas. These courses are normally available to stu-
dents in third or higher levels. These courses must coterminate
with project reports.
PHA F376 Design Project 3
PHA F377 Design Project 3
These courses are intended to impart training in design of prod-
uct/ process or other artifact to the students in the discipline or
interdisciplinary areas. These courses are normally available to
students in third or higher levels. These courses must cotermi-
nate with project reports.
PHA F413 Pharmaceutical Management and Quality 3 0 3
Control
Concepts of Pharmaceutical management, Managing of phar-
maceutical industry, planning, layouts, designs, current good
manufacturing practices, pharmaceutical process validation,
documentation, pilot plant scale up technique optimization,
pharmaceutical marketing, quality aspects and quality control,
managing hospital pharmacy and its importance.
PHA F414 Biopharmaceutics 3 0 3
Biopharmaceutics and Biopoharmaceutical aspects of drug de-
livery covering absorptions, distribution, metabolism and elimina-
tion (ADME) characters of drugs. Compartment model, pharma-
cokinetics of drugs and their applications, bioavailability, bioe-
quivalence and their studies, drug-drug interactions and other re-
I-98
lated matters.
PHA F415 Pathophysiology 3 0 3
Cellular pathology, inflammatory, genetic and immunological
disorders, infectious diseases- their expression and cause, tar-
gets for therapy, diseases of the organ systems, environmental
and nutritional pathology.
PHA F416 Chemistry of Synthetic Drugs 3 0 3
Heterocyclic drugs; methods of heterocyclic drug synthesis;
mechanisms of important heterocyclic compounds; mechanism
based optimization of lead compounds on target sites; biological
properties of heterocyclic drugs; synthesis of other special or-
ganic compounds of biological importance like polynuclear hy-
drocarbons etc. Introduction to Retrosynthetic approaches.
PHA F417 Pharmacoeconomics 3 0 3
Economic aspects of health care and its applications in the
health sector are broadly emphasized. Cost-benefit, cost-
effectiveness, cost-minimization, and cost-utility analyses to
compare the different pharmaceutical products, drug therapy
and treatments are focused. Economic concepts such as supply,
demand, efficiency, equity, health policy, market failures, health
insurance, pharmaceutical market, measurement of direct and
indirect costs to a health care program, economic issues, phar-
maceutical regulations, pricing policy and related topics will be
covered.
PHA F418 Biopharmaceutics and Pharmacokinetics 3 0 3
Biopharmaceutics and Biopharmaceutical aspects of drug deliv-
ery covering absorptions, distribution, metabolism and elimina-
tion (ADME) characters of drugs. Compartment model, pharma-
cokinetics of drugs and their applications, bioavailability, bioe-
quivalence and their studies, drug-drug interactions and other re-
lated matters.
PHA F419 Herbal Drug Technology 3 0 3
Operations in herbal drug industry, the quality of raw material,
guidelines for quality of herbal drugs, classical ayurvedic and
conventional formulations, nutraceuticals, herbal cosmetics,
herbal excipients etc. Good Manufacturing Practices (GMP), pa-
tenting and regulatory issues of herbal drugs.
Pre-requisite:
PHA F344 : Natural Drugs
PHA F422 Cosmetic Science 2 1 3
Principles of formulation of typical cosmetic preparations such as
cosmetic creams, powders, lipsticks, rouges, hair preparations,
dentrifices, aerosol cosmetics, perfumes for cosmetic, their
blending and mixing techniques. Some recent and new trends.
PHA F432 Hospital Pharmacy 3 0 3
Definition and function, location, organisation, staff, space,
equipment. Pharmaceutical services, Medical stores, objectives,
procedures for procurement and suplies, Distribution & control,
inspection of stocks, Licensing procedures for stocking of alco-
hol, narcotics, Maintenance ofrecords of stocks, issue and use.
Pharmaceutical services for out - patient and in - patient depart-
ment.
PHA F441 Biochemical Engineering 3 0 3
Principles of Chemical Engineering applied to Bioprocesses; Ki-
netic Models for growth, substrate utilization and product for-
mation; Biological reaction kinetics and applied enzyme cataly-
sis; immobilized biocatalysts; Bioreactor Design and Operation;
Fermentation, Upstream & Downstream processing; Novel Bio-
reactor Configurations; Transport phenomena in Bioprocesses;
Instrumentation and control; Bioprocess Optimization and Scale
up; Industrial Protein Purification Techniques; Commercial En-
zymes & Biopharmaceuticals; Bioprocess Patenting, Economics
& Feasibility Studies.
PHA F442 Applied Pharmaceutical Chemistry 3 0 3
The course comprises of structure, reactions and synthesis of
selected carbocyclic and heterocyclic ring systems. Their appli-
cation for drug design, structure activity relationship, pharmaco-
logical action, methods of assay.
VI
PHA F461 Phytochemistry 2 1 3
This course is intended to impart knowledge to the students in
the isolation, characterization and chemistry of the natural prod-
ucts derived from various sources, which are of pharmaceutical
importance. Intriguing chemistry involved in their invivo produc-
tion and their importance as structural materials, biologically ac-
tive molecules like toxins, hormones, life process substrates and
drugs will be covered in this course, the evaluation of these sub-
stances using qualitative and quantitative methods will also be
covered; specail emphasis will be given to newer techniques in
the biogenesis of these molecules.
PHA F491 Special Projects 3
This is an unstructured open-ended course where under the
overall supervision of an instructor-in-charge, batches of stu-
dents will be attached to different instructors. Each batch will
work on a specific time-bound project which is of basic or pe-
ripheral concern of his discipline. Each student must submit a
project report as a culmination of his endeavour and investiga-
tion. The instructor- in-charge will determine the choice of the
project and also whether or not the project report is to be submit-
ted jointly by a group or individually by a student. The course will
aim to evaluate student's actual ability to use the fundamentals
of knowledge and to meet new unknown situations as demon-
strated by the students' interaction with the instructors and in-
structor-in- charge and aggregated in the project report. The in-
structor-in- charge may assign specific hours for formal brain-
storming sessions.
PHA G510 Application of Statistics and Computer in 5
Pharmacy
to data classification, analysis and probability; statistical infer-
ence – estimation and hypothesis testing; linear regression and
correlation; design of experiments; analysis of variance; non
parametric procedures & tests; statistical quality control; experi-
mental design in clinical trials and validation; basic techniques in
optimization. Introduction to computer and its components; op-
erating systems; principles and use of standard software pack-
ages having application in drug design, development, analysis,
etc.; principles of software creation; processing concepts, flow
charting and algorithms, programming constructs, programming
languages, program development sequence; information sys-
tems: need, significance concepts, their analysis, design and
implementation; software life cycle with special reference to
software planning and maintenance.
PHA G511 Fermentation & Biotechnology 2 3 5
Industrial scale production by fermentation processes of antibiot-
ics, vitamins, alcohol and other selected products, development,
selection, isolation and preservation of mutants, media sterilisa-
tion, accretion and air sterlisation, continuous fermentation, re-
cent advances in fermentation biotechnology, enzymes, their
large scale extraction and purification, principles of immobilisa-
tion of enzymes and its applications.
PHA G512 Chemistry of Natural Drugs 3 1 4
Study of recent methods of phytochemical investigations with
reference to alkaloids like rauwolfia,vinca, cantharanthus etc.;
some selected steroids, terpenes & flavoring agents, their chem-
istry, structure activity relationship, pharmacological actions and
synthetic routes.
PHA G521 Molecular Biology & Immunology 3 1 4
General principles governing the structures and functions of var-
ious molecules of the immune system, acquired immune re-
sponses, immunological tolerance, genetic control of immunity,
hypersensitivity reactions, protein structure, functions, RNA and
DNA cloning, principles of Genetic Engineering and its future in
drug production.
PHA G522 Chemistry of Macromolecules 2 2 4
Physical, Chemical and Biological properties of biopolymers like
proteins, nucleic acids, poly saccharides. Synthetic polymers,
biomedical and pharmaceutical polymers with emphasis on re-
cent development.
PHA G523 Total Quality Management and Regulatory (5*)
Affairs
Quality control, quality assurance, total quality management,
I-99
various parameters for achieving quality products, application of
statistics in quality assurance, statistical process control, current
good manufacturing practice (cGMP), introduction to process
validation, drug regulatory affairs, clinical research protocols,
new drug applications, intellectual property rights.
PHA G531 Disinfection and Sterilization 2 2 4
Theories and kinetics of the disinfection reaction, study of the
principles involved in vivo and in vitro evaluation of disinfectants
and antiseptics, structure activity relationships of the representa-
tive groups of disinfectants, sterilisation, heat, ionizing and ultra-
violet radiations, ultrasonic waves, filtration, gaseous sterilisation
and cellular dessication methods, controls used and special
problems involved.
PHA G532 Quality Assurance & Regulatory Affairs 3 2 5
Quality control, quality assurance, quality management, various
parameters for achieving quality pharmaceutical products, appli-
cation of statistics in quality assurance, reliability, current good
manufacturing practice (cGMP) for pharmaceutical manufactur-
ing, pharmaceutical process validation, drug regulatory affairs,
clinical research protocols, new drug applications, drug product
labeling.
PHA G533 Pharmaceutical Process Chemistry 4
Selection of routes, process optimization, Catalysis, plant layout
and design, processes and flow sheets, Impurities - separation,
synthesis and characterization, Good manufacturing practices in
API (active pharmaceutical ingredients) industry, Industrial Safe-
ty, Occupational Health & Safety, Chiral separation.
PHA G534 Separation and Structure Elucidation 4
Techniques
Advance separation methods for complex Natural, Semisynthetic
and Synthetic New Chemical Entities (NCEs) using LC-MS, LC-
MS-MS, LC-NMR, GC-MS, GC-MS-MS, CE-MS, Supercritical
Fluid Chromatography. Structure elucidation of NCEs using 2D
and 3D (1H and 13C) Nuclear Magnetic Resonance (NMR)
spectroscopy and X-ray diffraction technique. Prediction of struc-
tures using Software tools.
PHA G535 Biomaterials 5
Introduction to biomaterials for pharmaceutical applications; pol-
ymeric biomaterials; Natural and synthetic polymers for drug de-
livery, regenerative medicine and nanomedicines; Polymer
properties including crystallinity, glass transition, polymer degra-
dation influencing pharmaceutical formulations; biocompatibility;
biodegradation; in-vitro and in-vivo assessment of polymer tox-
icity.
PHA G536 Cosmetics and Cosmeceuticals 3 2 5
Fundamental concepts required in the field of cosmetics and
cosmeceuticals, Biological aspects of cleansing and care re-
quired for skin, eye, lips, scalp, hair, nail etc. along with suitable
agents/ingredients required for the same, Various aspects of the
nature of cosmetic products and consumers’ demand with re-
spect to quality and elegancy, Regulatory and safety guidelines
catering cosmetic products, misbranded and spurious products,
Special purpose cosmeceutical products, herbal cosmetics etc.
PHA G537 Parenteral Product Development 5
Parenteral product & their types, products characteristics; Vehi-
cle requirement for Parenteral Product manufacturing; Formula-
tion & process consideration for development of parenteral
products; Various aspects of unit operation in parenteral product
manufacturing; Critical Quality attributes of Parenteral Product;
Sterilization techniques for parenteral products; Key require-
ments for aseptic processing; Lyophilization techniques of stable
product development; Regulatory consideration for safety as-
sessment of Parenteral Products; Packaging requirement for
Parenteral Drug Products; Regulatory perspective for complex
injectable products development and filing.
PHA G538 Immunopharmacology 4
The course will include an overview of the cell types and key
mediators involved in the innate and adaptive immune respons-
es, the use of antibody preparations and small molecule immu-
notherapeutics to target chronic inflammation, cancer, metabolic
diseases, neurodegenerative diseases and autoimmunity in se-
lected diseases. This course will explore the role of gut microbio-
VI-
ta and regulation of immune response. The development of
therapeutic anti-bodies and proteins will be discussed along with
aspects of immunotoxicology.
PHA G539 Principles of Drug Discovery 4
Concepts of cellular mechanisms and processes involving cell
surface receptors, membrane-bound enzymes, protein kinases,
proteases, integrins, transporters and channels that facilitate
drug discovery, with special emphasis on non-communicable
diseases such as neurological, neuropsychiatric diseases and
disorders, metabolic disorders, cancer. siRNA, anti-sense oligo-
nucleotides, transgenic animals in drug discovery, long non-
coding RNA, emerging trends in receptor - drug trafficking
PHA G540 Modern Pharmaceutical Analytical Tech- 3 1 4
niques
Principles of sample preparation, method development for anal-
ysis and characterization of Active Pharmaceutical Ingredients
(API) and formulations, using techniques such as High Perfor-
mance Liquid chromatography (HPLC), biochromatography, size
exclusion, affinity, chiral, fast protein chromatography (FPLC).
Characterization of nanopharmaceutcials using Atomic Force
Microscopy, Scanning Electron Microscopy, Transmission Elec-
tron Microscopy, Dynamic Light Scattering techniques. 1H and
13C Nuclear Magnetic Resonance (NMR) spectroscopy in struc-
tural characterization, Mass Spectrometry and its applications,
Elemental analysis, Optical, chiro-optical techniques in structure
elucidation.
PHA G541 Computer Aided Drug Design 3 2 5
3D structure and function of bio-molecules; targets of drugs and
design principles; molecular modeling methodologies;
cheminformatics, quantitative structure-activity relationships;
chemical compound databases and search tools; interactive
graphics in drug design; molecular surfaces and algorithm of au-
tomated docking of drugs into receptor sites; receptor mapping;
introduction to molecular modeling and docking software.
PHA G542 Advanced Physical Pharmaceutics 3 2 5
Preliminary evaluations and molecular optimization, Drug sub-
stance considerations including protein, peptide and biological
products, Bulk characterization, Solubility analysis, Rheology
and dispersed systems, Micrometrics and shape factor analysis,
Compression and compaction, Principles of dissolution, Dissolu-
tion test design and release kinetics evaluation, Compatibility
testing, Stability analysis and test design according to interna-
tional standard, Rationale basis of formulation recommendation.
PHA G543 Clinical Research 5*
Fundamentals of clinical trials including design, conduct, analy-
sis and interpretation, randomization and blinding methods,
sample size determination, recruitment methods, choice of con-
trols, ethical, regulatory and research clearance including GCP,
trial requirements-multi-centric/collaborative and related opera-
tional issues, data collection, processing, protocol management
and quality control issues, interim analysis and critical review of
intervention and therapies, design and results, statistical tech-
niques in analysis and interpretation of results, documentation
and reporting, pharmacovigilance.
PHA G544 Advanced Pharmaceutical Chemistry 3 2 5
Stereochemical aspects of drugs and biological molecules; effect
of stereochemistry on drug action and isomerism in various
drugs; rearrangements and name reactions useful in synthesis
of bioactive molecules; example applications of rearrangements
and name reactions in synthesis of existing drugs.
PHA G545 Intellectual property rights and Pharmaceu-3 0 3
ticals
Key aspects of intellectual property law and their impact on
Pharmaceutical industry; concept of property with respect to in-
tellectual creativity; emerging debates, policy issues and law re-
forms related to IPR with respect to pharmaceuticals; Issues of
Intellectual Property such as Patents, Copyright, Trademarks,
and Design; rules and regulations of marketing and competition;
Patent processing, infringement of patents, ethics and economic
issues related to IPR;
-100
PHA G546 Pharmaceutical Biostatistics 3 0 3
Different types of data; methods for data collection;organization
and summarization of data; probabilitydistributions; descriptive
measures (measures of centraltendency and measures of dis-
persion); sampling andestimation of parameters (point estimates
and intervalestimates); tests of hypothesis using parametric (t-
test andANOVA) and various non-parametric tests; correlation
andlinear regression; determination of sample size for a
study;estimating bio-equivalence of pharmaceutical products
PHA G547 Quality-by-Design in Pharmaceutical 3 2 5
ProductDevelopment
Principles and tools of Quality-by-Design (QbD) forpharmaceuti-
cal product development and manufacturing;essential elements
of QbD approach including basic riskanalysis techniques; con-
structing the quality target productprofile (QTPP); identification of
critical quality attributes(CQAs); critical process parameters
(CPPs); design ofexperiments (DoE); identifying design space
and controlstrategy; selection of critical factors using various
screeningdesigns; optimization of factors using various experi-
mentaldesigns; introduction to process analytical technolo-
gies(PAT)
PHA G548 Chemistry of Natural Drugs 3 2 5
Study of recent methods of chemical investigations on bioactive
secondary metabolites of plants, microbes and marine origin
with reference to alkaloids, steroids, terpenes, phenyl pro-
panoids (flavonoids, coumarins, stilbenes, lignans, etc.) their
chemistry, structure elucidation, structure activity relationships
and their synthesis.
PHA G611 Advanced Pharmacology 3 2 5
Biochemical pharmacology and cellular basis for pharmacologi-
cal functions, pharmacodynamics, organ systems pharmacology
– gastro-intestinal, cardiovascular, renal and respiratory sys-
tems, metabolic disorders, recent developments in the treatment
of infectious, communicable diseases -epidemics and pandem-
ics and their impact on organ systems and health, neurophar-
macology and psychotherapeutic agents, autocoids and auto-
immune disorders, free radical pharmacology and their role in
degenerative disorders, introduction to ethnopharmacology,
pharmacogenetics, Prosthetics as adjuncts, alternates to thera-
py.
PHA G612 Pharmacokinetics & Clinical Pharmacy 3 2 5
Introduction to pharmacokinetic modeling of drugs; Compart-
mental modelling including one compartmental and two com-
partmental models; Non-compartmental analysis (NCA); Bioe-
quivalence and comparative bioavailability studies; Pharmacoki-
netic Pharmacodynamic modelling techniques, determination of
order of absorption and absorption rate constant by Wagner-
Nelson method; non-linear pharmacokinetics; Pharmacokinetic
drug interactions; multi-dose pharmacokinetics of drugs following
one compartmental model; Design of multi-dose regimen; Dos-
age regimen adjustment in renal impairment; Application of the
pharmacokinetic principles for better therapeutic outcomes.
PHA G613 Pharmaceutical Biotechnology 3 2 5
Molecular biology, immunology, recombinant DNA technology
and principles of biochemical engineering. Application of bio-
technology in diagnosis, therapeutics and production of products
of fermentation. Bioinformatic tools required to store, analyze
and use biological information for therapeutic utility, immense
potentiality and application f decoding the human genome.
PHA G614 Clinical Pharmacy and Therapeutics 3 2 5
Basic concepts of Clinical pharmacy and its applications, analy-
sis of patient data interpretation of clinical laboratory tests, drug
information queries, their sources and interpretation of the infor-
mation. Clinical pharmacokinetics, therapeutic drug monitoring,
drug-drug interactions.
PHA G615 Pharmacy Practice 3 2 5
Overview of health care systems, providing drug information,
physical examination, diagnostic procedures, drug administra-
tion, selection of alternate therapies, clinical alert, nutrition and
electrolyte therapy, documentation of pharmacy services, patient
counseling, paediatric pharmacy practice, evaluation of drug re-
lated problems, environmental, and health care management.
VI-
PHA G616 Pharmaceutical Administration and Man-3 2 5
agement
Technology innovation and creativity, new drugs and products
planning, strategic considerations, project implementation, prod-
uct development, production management and scale up, prepa-
ration of product literature and marketing strategy, IPR process-
es, human resource development, industrial relations, documen-
tation, R & D management, ethical aspects.
PHA G617 Advanced Drug Delivery Systems 3 2 5
A study of physicochemical and biopharmaceutical factors in-
volved in the design of novel drug delivery systems like mucosal,
particulate systems for systemic delivery of bioactive molecules.
Special considerations for delivery of protein, peptide and other
biological products. In vitro and in vivo evaluation of novel drug
delivery systems.
PHA G618 Reterosynthetic Analysis 3 2 5
Methods and techniques to transform target molecule to precur-
sors, functional group, stereo-chemical, structural, transform
based and topological strategies involving organic reactions,
functional group inter-conversions, reconnection and disconnec-
tion approaches, acyclic, ring structure synthesis, rearrangement
reactions pertaining to the synthesis of selected medicinally im-
portant compounds.
PHA G619 Screening Methods and Techniques In 3 2 5
Pharmacology
Ethics in animal research, CPCSEA guidelines, Biochemical as-
says, qualitative and quantitative estimation of receptor specific
drugs, animal handling, breeding, nutrition and diet manipulation
for testing, methods and techniques involved, therein. Design
and development of new animal models and evaluation tech-
niques for co-morbid illnesses and their standardization, toxico-
logical, teratogenic, carcinogenic studies, data analysis, normali-
zation in tabular and graphical formats.
PHA G621 Advanced Medicinal Chemistry 32 5
Methods of Modern Drug Discovery such as Me too drugs, Pep-
tidomimetics, Diversity oriented synthesis, Lead optimization,
Rational Drug Design, etc, Pro-drugs, Combinatorial Chemistry,
Principles of Green Chemistry in drug synthesis
PHA G622 Chemistry of Natural Drugs & Macromole -3 2 5
cules
Size and shape of macromolecules, biomedical polymers, their
structure, synthesis and function, chemistry of newer oral con-
traceptive agents, terpenes used as flavouring agents, newer
phytochemical investigations in glycosides, alkaloids, etc.
PHA G623 Pharmaceutical Applications of Polymers 5
and Biopolymers
Analysis and design of materials used in contact with biological
systems, surface molecular interactions, approaches to design
materials that control cell functions and their application in tissue
engineering, drug delivery, vaccines, and targetting. Basic con-
cepts behind synthetic and bio-polymers that interfere with cellu-
lar biological functions, their manufacturing, characterization and
applications of smart biomaterials in healthcare, nanotherapeu-
tics. Wear particles, Cementless fixation, porous ingrowth mate-
rials, PSHA, chemically deposited coatings, Fracture fixation,
fracture fixation plates, degradable fixation plate, bone screws
and plugs, Calcium phosphate and polyalkenoate cements,
Bone substitutes, autografts and allografts, Apatite glass ceram-
ics, Bioglass/ sol-gel, Porous ceramics, Porous metals and po-
rous glass, Materials based on natural products, collagen based
materials, alginates, hyaluronic acid and chitin, Blood contacting
devices, vascular grafts, stents, catheters and heart valves, arti-
ficial organs.
PHA G624 Principles of Toxicology 5
Principles, Organization of Economic Cooperation and Devel-
opment (OECD), International Council for Harmonization (ICH)
guidelines, toxicity testing methods in organ systems – acute,
sub-acute, chronic, dermal, inhalational, reproductive, genotoxi-
city, invivo, invitro, insilico toxicity studies, toxicokinetics evalua-
tion in preclinical studies, saturation kinetics, mutagenicity, safe-
ty pharmacology.
-101
PHA G625 Cellular and Molecular Pharmacology 5
Molecular basis of the action of drugs; characteristics of interac-
tions between drug molecules and substrates of drug action in
the cell including cell signalling pathways; molecular, biochemi-
cal and cell biological techniques; proteomics, epigenomics and
pharmaco-genomics in therapeutics, long non-coding RNA,
pathophysiology of protease receptors.
PHA G626 Pharmacovigilance 4
Scope and purpose of pharmacovigilance, safety and Adverse
Drug Reactions (ADRs)- causation, pre-clinical, human volun-
teer, post marketing surveillance studies, signal detection, as-
sessment and risk/crisis management and planning, legislation,
regulatory system, WHO, ICH, OECD, Council for International
Organizations of Medical Sciences (CIOMS) guidelines, stake-
holders perspectives, ethical principles transparency, pharma-
covigilance of select organ systems such as cardiovascular, re-
nal and conditions like pregnancy, pediatrics, geriatrics, current
limitations and future perspectives, individualized therapy con-
siderations.
PHA G627 Medical Devices and Testing 4
ISO and OECD guidelines for medical devices and related assay
methods, in vitro and in vivo models for sensitization, toxicity and
safety, Blood, system function analysis and their significance,
drug eluting stents, pacemakers, prefilled, programmable drug
delivery systems, dental and bone cements, replacement pros-
thetics for organs based on function, regulation, diagnostic in-
struments in healthcare, newer tools and techniques in diagno-
sis, treatment - such as Optical Coherence Tomography, frac-
ture putty, tissue regeneration, robotic assist devices, etc.
PHA G632 Dosage Form Design 3 2 5
Role of physical, chemical and biopharmaceutical factors (prefor-
mulation studies) of drug in the design, manufacture and stability
of dosage forms; dosage form factors affecting the absorption of
drugs; Biopharmaceutical Classification System (BCS); develop-
ment of in-vitro in-vivo correlation; Controlled release drug delivery
systems; Design of delivery systems for various routes/purposes
like oral (gastro-retention, colon targeted), parenteral, buc-
cal/sublingual, nasal, ocular, pulmonary and transdermal.
PHA G642 Laboratory Project 6
Exercises illustrating principles discussed in theory courses.
PHA G645 Molecular Pharmacology 3 0 3
Molecular basis of the action of drugs; the characteristics of in-
teractions between drug molecules and substrates of drug action
in the cell; molecular, biochemical and cell biological techniques;
response of cells to pharmacologic agents.
Physics
PHY F110 Physics Laboratory 0 2 1
An introductory experimental course covering experiments in
Mechanics, Oscillations and Waves. In addition to performing
classic experiments in physics, the course aims at strengthening
experimental skills and ability to take proper measurements. The
course should motivate students to enter the exciting world of
experimental physics.
PHY F111 Mechanics, Oscillations and Waves 3 0 3
Conservation Principles, Rotational Dynamics, Oscillations,
Wave Motion, Reflection and Refraction, Interference, Diffrac-
tion, Polarisation.
PHY F112 General Physics 3 0 3
Philosophy of Science; Newton’s laws of motion; Work Energy,
Impulse and Momentum; Equilibrium; Moment of a force; Rota-
tion; Periodic motion; First law of thermodynamics; Second law
of thermodynamics; Electromagnetic waves; Interference and
diffraction; Polarization; Relativistic mechanics; Photons, Elec-
trons and Atoms; Quantum Mechanics; Atoms, Molecules and
Solids; Nuclear Physics.
PHY F211 Classical Mechanics 3 1 4
Review of Newtonian mechanics, constraints and generalized
coordinates, Lagrange’s equation of motion, calculus of variation
and principle of least action, central force motion, kinematics of
VI-
rigid body motion, rigid body equations of motion, heavy sym-
metrical top, Hamilton’s equations of motion, canonical transfor-
mations.
PHY F212 Electromagnetic Theory I 3 0 3
Review of mathematics - scalar and vector fields, calculus of
scalar and vector fields in Cartesian and curvilinear coordinates,
Dirac delta function; Electrostatics - electric field, divergence &
curl of e(cid:10) lectric field, electric potential, work and energ y in elec-
trostatics, conductors, electric dipole; Electrostatics in Matter -
polarization and field of a polarized object, electric displacement,
linear dielectrics; Magnetostatics - Lorentz force law, Biot-Savart
law, divergence & curl of magnetic field, magnetic vector poten-
tial, magnetic dipole; Magnetostatics in matter - magnetization
and field of a magnetized object, the H-field, linear & non-linear
magnetic media; Electrodynamics - electromotive force, electro-
magnetic induction, Maxwell's equations in free space, plane
wave solutions of Maxwell’s equations in free space.
PHY F213 Optics 3 0 3
Geometrical optics - light as rays, Fermat’s principle, matrix
methods in ray tracing; scalar wave t(cid:10)heory of light, spatial and
temporal coherence, theory of diffraction - Fresnel & Fraunhoffer
diffraction, diffraction at rectangular and circular aperture, diffrac-
tion around opaque objects; crystal optics - electromagnetic
wave propagation in anisotropic media, birefringence, e-m
waves in n(cid:10) onlinear media, eleme nts of nonlinear optics; scat-
tering of light – Thomson and Rayleigh scattering; elements of
modern optics - lasers and applications, holography, fiber optics,
Fourier optics.
PHY F214 Electricity, Magnetism, and Optics Lab 0 2 2
This lab will consist of experiments on electromagnetism, optics
and lasers.
PHY F215 Introduction to Astronomy and Astrophys- 3 0 3
ics
Introduction and scope, telescopes, distance and size meas-
urements of astronomical objects, celestial mechanics, the Sun,
planets, planet formation, interstellar medium, star formation,
stellar structure, stellar evolution, star clusters - open clusters,
globular clusters, the Milky-Way galaxy, nature of galaxies -
normal and active galaxies, Newtonian cosmology, cosmic mi-
crowave background radiation, the early universe.
PHY F221 Modern Physics 3 0 3
Special theory of relativity; quantum mechanics and ap-
plications; atomic and molecular physics; statistical phys-
ics; nuclear physics.
PHY F241 Electromagnetic Theory II 3 1 4
Maxwell's equations in matter, boundary conditions on electric
and magnetic fields; energy of e-m fields and Poynting’s theo-
rem, linear momentum and angular momentum of e-m fields,
Maxwell's stress tensor; electromagnetic waves in dielectric me-
dia – reflection, refraction and transmission at interfaces; wave
propagation in metals – absorption and dispersion; guided
waves; potential formulation of e-m fields, retarded potentials &
Jefimenko's equations, Lienard-Weichert potentials and fields of
a moving point charge; dipole radiation & radiation due to point
charges; special theory of relativity, relativistic mechanics, rela-
tivistic electrodynamics.
PHY F242 Quantum Mechanics I 3 0 3
Origin of the quantum theory - black body radiation, photoelectric
effect, Compton scattering, electron diffraction, Bohr model of
hydrogen atom, Frank-Hertz experiment, Bohr-Sommerfeld
quantization condition; notion of wave function, statistical inter-
pretation of the wave function, issues of normalization, the Hei-
senberg uncertainty relation; Schrodinger equation, stationary
states and time i(cid:10)ndependent Schrodinger equation, energy ei-
genvalues and eigenfunctions, one-dimensional problems – po-
tential wells, potential barriers, the harmonic oscillator; Hilbert
space formalism – state vectors, Dirac’s bra-ket notation, ob-
servables as Hermitian operators, eigenvalues and eigenstates
of Hermitian operators, the measurement postulate.
-102
PHY F243 Mathematical Methods of Physics 3 0 3
Tensor analysis in Cartesian and curvilinear coordinates; linear
vector spaces, linear transformations and theory of matrices;
functions of a complex variable, contour integration and applica-
tions; elements of calculus of variation; series solution of ordi-
nary differential equations, special functions, Sturm-Liouville
theory; Fourier integral; partial differential equations of physics,
solution of partial differential equations by separation of varia-
bles method, the Green function method.
PHY F244 Modern Physics Lab 0 2 2
This lab will consist of experiments on modern physics and elec-
tromagnetism.
PHY F266 Study Project 3
These courses include projects which are oriented towards read-
ings from published literature or books about new frontiers of
development or analysis of available database. These courses
are normally available to students in second or higher levels.
These courses must coterminate with project reports.
PHY F311 Quantum Mechanics II 3 0 3
Hilbert space formalism (continued from QM-I) - operators and
their matrix representations, change of basis, position and mo-
mentum representations, commuting and non-commuting ob-
servables, the generalized uncertainty relation; the time evolu-
tion operator and Schrodinger equation, Schrodinger and Hei-
senberg picture, simple harmonic oscillator using operator meth-
od; angular momentum operators and their commutation rela-
tions, eigenvalues and eigenvectors of angular momentum,
spherically symmetric potentials, the hydrogen atom; time inde-
pendent perturbation theory, WKB approximation, variational
method; time dependent perturbation theory, interaction of atom
with classical radiation field; identical particles.
PHY F312 Statistical Mechanics 3 0 3
Review of Thermodynamics - First and the second law of ther-
modynamics, reversible and irreversible processes, entropy, ab-
solute temperature, thermodynamic potentials ; Statistical de-
scription of macroscopic systems - micro and macro states,
phase space distribution, Liouville theorem, microcanonical en-
semble, statistical definition of temperature, pressure and entro-
py; Canonical ensembles, probability distribution in canonical
ensemble, partition function and calculation of thermodynamic
quantities, equipartition and virial theorems, Maxwell velocity dis-
tribution, paramgnetism, harmonic oscillators, polyatomic mole-
cules; Grand canonical ensembles - probability distribution in
grand canonical ensemble, grand partition function, calculation
of thermodynamic quantities; Quantum statistics - indistinguish-
able particles, Bose-Einstein and Fermi-Dirac distribution, clas-
sical limit, photon statistics, Planck distribution; Ideal Fermi gas -
equation of state of ideal Fermi gas, free electron gas in metals,
Pauli paramagnetism, Landau diamagnetism, statistical equilib-
rium of white dwarf stars; Ideal Bose Gas - equation of state,
Bose-Einstein condensation.
PHY F313 Computational Physics 3 0 3
Review of programming language - C/C++, Matlab and Mathe-
matica; Functions and roots - Newton-Raphson method, rate of
convergence, system of algebraic equations; Numerical integra-
tion - Romberg integration, Gaussian quadrature; Ordinary dif-
ferential equations - Euler Method, Runge-Kutta method, predic-
tor-corrector method, system of equations; Partial differential
equations - boundary value problems, finite difference method,
finite element method; discrete and fast Fourier transform; Eig-
en-value problems; Monte-Carlo method - random numbers,
sampling rules, metropolis algorithm.
PHY F315 Theory of Relativity 3 0 3
Special theory of relativity : Experimental background and postu-
lates of the special theory, Lorentz transformation equations and
their implications, space-time diagrams, Four vectors, tensors in
flat space-time, relativistic kinematics and dynamics, relativistic
electromagnetism. General theory of relativity : Principle of
equivalence, gravitational red shift, geometry of curved space-
time, Einstein field equation, spherically symmetric solution of
field equation.
VI-
PHY F316 Musical Acoustics 3 0 3
Mathematical description of sound waves; physical
sound production by vibrations in different dimensions; percep-
tion of music by the human ear and brain, the scientific meaning
of psycho-acoustic concepts of pitch, loudness and timbre; Fou-
rier analysis as a tool for characterizing timbre; musical scales,
harmonics and tones; musical instruments with plucked, bowed
and struck strings, wood-wind instruments, reed instruments and
the human voice, percussions instruments such as tympani, and
drums; engineering for sound reproduction in transducers,
mikes, amplifiers and loudspeakers; sound spectrum analysis;
basics of signal processing for electronic music production, filtra-
tion and enhancement; rudiments of room and auditorium acous-
tics ; hands-on work and projects.
PHY F317 Introduction to Radio Astronomy 3 0 3
Overview of Astronomy, Stellar and Galactic Astrophysics,
Bremsstrahlung, Synchrotron radiation, free-free radiation, and
Compton scattering, Radiative- transitions/line-emission, The ra-
dio sky and sources of radio signals, Theory of statistical random
signals, Radio telescopes and Radio observations. Techniques
of Line and continuum observations, Pulsar observations. Radio
telescopes, antennas and receivers. Single dish and interfero-
metric observations, Beam patterns, aperture synthesis and de-
convolution, Phased arrays, Flux and Phase Calibration tech-
niques. Study some radio telescopes GMRT, VLA, OWFA.
PHY F341 Solid State Physics 3 0 3
Crystal structure - direct and reciprocal lattice, Brillouin zone, X-
ray diffraction and crystal structure; free electron theory of met-
als; periodic potential and band theory of solids, the tight-binding
approximation; lattice vibration and thermal properties; semicon-
ductors - energy band gap in semiconductors, carrier density of
intrinsic and extrinsic semiconductors, the p-n junction; mag-
netism - paramagnetism and diamagnetism, spontaneous mag-
netism, magnetic ordering; super conductivity-basic properties,
the London equation, elements of BCS theory.
PHY F342 Atomic and Molecular Physics 3 0 3
Interaction of electromagnetic field with atoms - transition rates,
dipole approximation, Einstein coefficients, selection rules and
spectrum of one electron atom, line intensities and shapes, line
widths and lifetimes; one electron atoms - fine and hyperfine
structure, interaction with external electric and magnetic fields;
two electron atoms - para and ortho states, level scheme,
ground and exited states of two electron atoms; many electron
atoms - central field approximation, Thomas –Fermi model, Har-
tree- Fock method, L-S coupling and j-j coupling; Molecular
structure - Born-Oppenheimer approximation, rotation and vibra-
tion of diatomic and polyatomic molecules, electronic structure
and spin, rotational-vibrational and electronic spectra of diatomic
molecules, nuclear spin.
PHY F343 Nuclear and Particle Physics 3 0 3
Bethe-Weizsacker mass formula, nuclear size, mirror nuclei,
electric multipole moments, Spherically and axially symmetric
charge distribution, electric quadrupole moment, nuclear mag-
netic moment, nuclear decay, alpha and beta decay processes,
nuclear fission, Bohr-Wheeler theory, two-body problem, deuter-
on wave function with central and non-central potential, electric
quadrupole moment & magnetic moment, exchange forces, low
energy nucleon-nucleon scattering, scattering length, effective
range theory, spin dependence of n-p scattering, magic num-
bers, independent particle model, collective model. Mesons and
baryons, antiparticles, neutrinos, strange particles, eightfold way,
quark model, intermediate vector bosons, four fundamental forc-
es, basic vertices and charactesitics of quantum electrodynam-
ics, quantum flavordyamics and quantum chromo dynamics, de-
cays and conservations laws, basic ideas of standard model of
particle physics, qualitative discussion of current issues in parti-
cle physics.
PHY F344 Advanced Physics Lab 0 3 3
This lab will consist of experiments on solid state physics, spec-
troscopy and nuclear physics.
-103
PHY F345 Quantum Mechanics for Engineers 3 0 3
Wave particle duality, Schrödinger wave equation, probability
and current densities, position and momentum operators and
state space, expectation values of operators, normalization, par-
ticle in a box, particle in finite height barrier and finite well, reflec-
tion and transmission, Harmonic oscillator, particle in linearly
varying potential, Infinite potential well, delta function potential.
Time dependent Schrödinger equation, time evolution of station-
ary states: Infinite well and harmonic oscillator, wave packets
and time evolution with example, group velocity.
Crystals, one electron approximation, Bloch theorem, density of
states in k space, effective mass theory, effective mass approx-
imation in semiconductor heterostructures, density of states in
energy, density of states in quantum well, K.P model for two-
band semi conductor. Band structure calculations for cubic crys-
tals, Nanostructures: quantum wire, quantum well, quantum dots
PHY F346 Laser Science and Technology 3 0 3
Introduction to lasers, theory of radiation, laser basics, optical
resonators, longitudinal / transverse modes, pumping of laser
media, Line broadening mechanism, Transient behaviour - Q-
switching, mode locking, devices, techniques; Types of lasers -
solid state lasers, gas lasers, liquid lasers, semiconductor laser,
x-ray laser, free electron laser, maser; Non-linear optics: Phase
matching, second harmonic generation, third harmonic genera-
tion, difference frequency generation, optical parametric genera-
tion; Applications of lasers : Industry, medicine, biology, optical
/quantum communication, thermonuclear fusion, isotope separa-
tion, holography, laser cooling.
Pre-requisite: PHY F212: Electromagnetic Theory I or EEE
F212 or INSTR F212 or ECE F212 : Electromagnetic Theory
PHY F366 Lab Project 3
PHY F367 Lab Project 3
These courses include projects involving laboratory investigation
or laboratory development in the students discipline or interdis-
ciplinary areas. These courses are normally available to stu-
dents in third or higher levels. These courses must coterminate
with project reports.
PHY F376 Design Project 3
PHY F377 Design Project 3
These courses are intended to impart training in design of prod-
uct/ process or other artifact to the students in the discipline or
interdisciplinary areas. These courses are normally available to
students in third or higher levels. These courses must cotermi-
nate with project reports.
PHY F378 Plasma Physics and its Applications 3 0 3
Introduction to plasma physics. Motion of single charged parti-
cles in Electric and Magnetic fields. Fluid description of plasma
and study of waves in plasmas, Theory of instabilities in plasma,
A Kinetic theory description of plasma and some basic plasma
phenomenon, Applications of plasma physics to plasma based
accelerators, plasma based energy radiation sources, magnetic
confinement fusion, laser-plasma interaction, astrophysical
plasma, and studying plasma physics using computer simula-
tion.
PHY F379 Thin Film Technology 3 0 3
Overview of thin film technology, Structure and bonding of mate-
rials, Defects in thin film, Thermodynamics and phase diagram,
Kinetics and diffusion mechanism, Surface nucleation and film
growth, Epitaxy and growth modes, Basics of vacuum science
and technology, Thin film growth technology, Epitaxial growth
techniques, Structure and morphology of thin films, Surface re-
construction and surface chemistry, Electrical and magnetic
properties, Special topics on thin film application, Laboratory
based experiments or assignments related to thin films.
PHY F412 Introduction to Quantum Field Theory 3 1 4
Klein-Gordan equation, SU(2) and rotation group, SL(2,C) and
Lorentz Group, antiparticles, construction of Dirac Spinors, alge-
bra of gamma matrices, Maxwell and Proca equations, Max-
well's equations and differential geometry; Lagrangian Formula-
tion of particle mechanics, real scalar field and Noether's theo-
rem, real and complex scalar fields, Yang-Mills field, geometry of
VI-
gauge fields, cannonical quantization of Klein-Gordan, Dirac and
Electromagnetic field, spontaneously broken gauge symmetries,
Goldstone theorem, superconductivity.
PHY F413 Particle Physics 3 1 4
Klein-Gordan equation, time-dependent non-relativistic perturba-
tion theory, spinless electron-muon scattering and electron-
positron scattering, crossing symmetry, Dirac equation, standard
examples of scattering, parity violation and V-A interaction, beta
decay, muon decay, weak neutral currents, Cabibo angle, weak
mixing angles, CP violation, Weak isospin and hypercharge,
basic electroweak interaction, Lagrangian and single particle
wave-equation, U(1) local gauge invariance and QED, non-
abelian gauge invariance and QCD, spontaneous symmetry
breaking, Higgs mechanism, spontaneous breaking of local
SU(2) gauge symmetry.
PHY F414 Physics of Advanced Materials 3 1 4
Review of fundamentals of crystallography, structural properties
of crystals, polymers and glasses, processes involved in materi-
als preparation, viz., diffusion, phase diagrams, advanced tech-
niques to prepare low dimensional systems and thin films, kinet-
ics of phase transformations, Mechanical, structural, thermal and
electrical characterization of advanced materials, e.g., high Tc
superconductors, superionic conductors, conducting polymers,
dielectrics, ferroelectric materials, polycrystalline semiconducting
materials, magnetic semiconductors, magneto resistance and
GMR materials, shape memory alloys.
PHY F415 General Theory of Relativity and Cosmolo-3 1 4
gy
Review of relativistic mechanics, gravity as geometry, descrip-
tions of curved space-time, tensor analysis, geodesic equations,
affine connections, parallel transport, Riemann and Ricci ten-
sors, Einstein’s equations, Schwarzschild solution, classic tests
of general theory of relativity, mapping the universe, Friedmann-
Robertson-Walker (FRW) cosmological model, Friedmann equa-
tion and the evolution of the universe, thermal history of the early
universe, shortcomings of standard model of cosmology, theory
of inflation, cosmic microwave background radiations (CMBR),
baryogenesis, dark matter & dark energy.
PHY F416 Soft Condensed Matter Physics 3 1 4
Forces, energies, timescale and dimensionality in soft con-
densed matter, phase transition, mean field theory and its
breakdown, simulation of Ising spin using Monte Carlo and mo-
lecular dynamics, colloidal dispersion, polymer physics, molecu-
lar order in soft condensed matter – i) liquid crystals ii) polymer,
supramolecular self assembly.
PHY F417 Experimental Methods of Physics 3 1 4
Vacuum techniques, sample preparation techniques, X-ray dif-
fraction, scanning probe microscopy, scanning electron micros-
copy, low temperature techniques, magnetic measurements,
Mossbauer and positron annihilation spectroscopy, neutron dif-
fraction, Rutherford backscattering, techniques in nuclear exper-
imentation, high energy accelerators.
PHY F418 Lasers and Applications 3 1 4
Properties of laser light, theories of some simple optical pro-
cesses, basic principles of lasers, solid-state lasers, gas lasers,
semiconductor lasers, free electron lasers, liquid, dye and chem-
ical lasers, dynamics of laser processes, advances in laser phys-
ics, Q-switching, modelocking (active and passive), saturable
absorbers, Kerr lens mode locking, non-linear optics, laser spec-
troscopy, time resolved spectroscopy, multi-photon spectrosco-
py.
PHY F419 Advanced Solid State Physics 3 1 4
Schrodinger field theory (second quantized formalism), Bose
and Fermi fields, equivalence with many body quantum mechan-
ics, particles and holes, single particle Green functions and
propagators, diagrammatic techniques, application to Fermi sys-
tems (electrons in a metal, electron – phonon interaction) and
Bose systems (superconductivity, superfluidity).
PHY F420 Quantum Optics 3 1 4
Quantization of the electromagnetic field, single mode and mul-
timode fields, vacuum fluctuations and zero-point energy, coher-
ent states, atom - field interaction - semiclassical and quantum,
-104
the Rabi model, Jaynes-Cummings model, beam splitters and in-
terferometry, squeezed states, lasers.
PHY F421 Advanced Quantum Mechanics 3 1 4
Symmetries, conservation laws and degeneracies; Discrete
symmetries - parity, lattice translations and time reversal; Identi-
cal particles, permutation symmetry, symmetrization postulate,
two-electron system, the helium atom; Scattering theory - Lipp-
man-Schwinger equation, Born approximation, optical theorem,
eikonal approximation, method of partial waves; Quantum theory
of radiation - quantization of electromagnetic field, interaction of
electromagnetic radiation with atoms; relativistic quantum me-
chanics.
PHY F422 Group Theory and Applications 3 1 4
Basic concepts – group axioms and examples of groups, sub-
groups, cosets, invariant subgroups; group representation – uni-
tary representation, irreducible representation, character table,
Schur’s lemmas; the point symmetry group and applications to
molecular and crystal structure; Continuous groups – Lie groups,
infinitesimal transformation, structure constants; Lie algebras, ir-
reducible representations of Lie groups and Lie algebras; linear
groups, rotation groups, groups of the standard model of particle
physics.
PHY F423 Special Topics in Statistical Mechanics 3 1 4
The Ising Model – Definition, equivalence to other models, spon-
taneous magnetization, Bragg- William approximation, Bethe-
Peierls Approximation, one dimensional Ising model, exact solu-
tion in one and two dimensions; Landau’s mean field theory for
phase transition – the order parameter, correlation function and
fluctuation-dissipation theorem, critical exponents, calculation of
critical exponents, scale invariance, field driven transitions, tem-
perature driven condition, Landau-Ginzberg theory, two-point
correlation function, Ginzberg criterion, Gaussian approximation;
Scaling hypothesis – universality and universality classes,
renormalization group; Elements of nonequilibrium statistical
mechanics – Brownian motion, diffusion and Langevin equation,
relation between dissipation and fluctuating force, Fokker-Planck
equation.
PHY F424 Advanced Electrodynamics 3 1 4
Review of Maxwell’s equations – Maxwell’s equations, scalar
and vector potentials, gauge transformations of the potentials,
the electromagnetic wave equation, retarded and advanced
Green’s functions for the wave equation and their interpretation,
transformation properties of electromagnetic fields; Radiating
systems – multipole expansion of radiation fields, energy and
angular momentum of multipole radiation, multipole radiation in
atoms and nuclei, multipole radiation from a linear, centre-fed
antenna; Scattering and diffraction – perturbation theory of scat-
tering, scattering by gases and liquids, scattering of EM waves
by a sphere, scalar and vector diffraction theory, diffraction by a
circular aperture; Dynamics of relativistic particles and EM fields
– Lagrangian of a relativistic charged particle in an EM field, mo-
tion in uniform, static electromagnetic fields, Lagrangian of the
EM fields, solution of wave equation in covariant form, invariant
Green’s functions; Collisions, energy loss and scattering of a
charged particle, Cherenkov radiation, the Bremsstrahlung; Ra-
diation by moving charges – Lienard-Wiechert potentials and
fields, Larmor’s formula and its relativistic generalization; Radia-
tion damping – radiative reaction force from conservation of en-
ergy, Abraham-Lorentz model.
PHYF425 Advanced Mathematical Methods ofPhysics 3 1 4
Course description is to be developed.
PHY F426 Physics of Semiconductor Devices 3 1 4
Course description is to be developed.
PHY F427 Atmospheric Physics 3 0 3
Course description is to be developed.
PHY F428 Quantum Information Theory 3 0 3
Classical Information, probability and information measures,
methods of open quantum systems using density operator for-
malism, quantum operations, Kraus operators. Measurement
and information, Entropy and information, data compression,
channel capacity, Resource theory of quantum correlations and
VI-
coherence, and some current issues.
PHY F431 Geometrical Methods in Physics 3 0 3
Manifolds, tensors, differential forms and examples from Phys-
ics, Riemannian geometry, relevance of topology to Physics, in-
tegration on a manifold, Gauss theorem and Stokes’ theorem us-
ing integrals of differential forms, fibre bundles and connections,
applications of geometrical methods in Classical and Quantum
Mechanics, Electrodynamics, Gravitation, and Quantum field
theory.
PHY F432 Classical Theory of Fields: A Symmetry 4*
Perspective
Rotations in real complex and Minkowski spaces laying group
theoretical basis of 3-tensors and 4 tensors and spinors, transi-
tion from a discrete to continuous system, stress energy tensor,
relativistic field theory, Noether’s theorem, tensor and spinor
fields as representation of Lorentz group, action for spin-0 and
spin-1/2, and super-symmetric multiplet, introduction of spin-1,
spin-2 and spin-3/2 through appropriate local symmetries of
spin-0 and spin-1/2 actions.
PHY F433 Topics in Nonlinear Optics 3 0 3
Lorentz model for various order nonlinearities, properties of ten-
sor elements; Second order processes (second harmonic gen-
eration, Pockels effect, optical parametric oscillator); phase
matching in crystals; Third order processes (third harmonic gen-
eration, phase conjugation, Kerr effect, self-phase modulation,
Raman effect, Stimulated Raman scattering (Stokes / anti-
Stokes), Stimulated Brillouin scattering); Light interaction with
plasma (waves in plasmas, Landau damping, absorption of light
by inverse Bremsstrahlung, resonance absorption, two plasmon
absorption, parametric decay, stimulated Raman scattering,
stimulated Brillouin scattering); Concepts of ponderomotive force
/ energy, second harmonic generation in plasma, self-focussing,
above threshold ionization, odd harmonic generation, optical
field ionization, Coulomb explosion; Applications : Holography
(low intensity), optical solitons (medium intensity), inertial con-
finement fusion (high intensity) and acceleration of charged par-
ticles with light (ultra-high intensity).
Pre-requisites: PHY F212 & PHY F213
PHY F434 Foundations of Quantum Mechanics 3 0 3
A review of pre-quantum (classical) theories from the lens of de-
terminism, locality, ontology, measurement, and abstract spac-
es; A discussion on Bell’s generic formulation of locality and on-
tological issues through gauge redundancy in the description of
electrodynamics; Review basic quantum theory and develop a
toolbox for simple quantum examples to be used later to address
the issues of locality, ontology and measurement; The meas-
urement problem; the locality problem; the ontology problem;
Copenhagen interpretation; Bohm’s Pilot wave theory; Bell’s
theorem; many world interpretations.
Pre-requisite: PHY F242: Quantum Mechanics I
PHY F491 Special Project 3
This is an unstructured open-ended course where under the
overall supervision of an instructor-in-charge, batches of stu-
dents will be attached to different instructors. Each batch will
work on a specific time-bound project which is of basic or pe-
ripheral concern of his discipline. Each student must submit a
project report as a culmination of his endeavour and investiga-
tion. The instructor- in-charge will determine the choice of the
project and also whether or not the project report is to be submit-
ted jointly by a group or individually by a student. The course will
aim to evaluate student's actual ability to use the fundamentals
of knowledge and to meet new unknown situations as demon-
strated by the students' interaction with the instructors and in-
structor-in- charge and aggregated in the project report. The in-
structor-in- charge may assign specific hours for formal brain-
storming sessions.
PHY G511 Theoretical Physics 5
Calculus of Variations and its applications to Lagrangian and
Hamiltonian Dynamics, Thermodynamics and Geometric Optics
and Electrodynamics. Geometric and Group theoretic founda-
tions of Hamiltonian Dynamics, Hamilton-Jacobi Theory, Inte-
grability and Action-Angle Variables, Adiabatic Invariants, Trans-
formation (Lie) Groups and Classical Mechanics. Modern Theory
-105
of Phase Transitions and Critical Phenomenon: Thermodynam-
ics and Statistical Mechanics of Phase Transitions, General
Properties (eg Scaling, Universality, Critical exponents) and Or-
der of Phase Transitions; Introduction to Landau-Ginzburg
(Mean Field Theory) theory for Second Order Phase Transitions,
the Ising Model and some Examples, Phase Transitions as a
symmetry-breaking phenomenon.
PHY G512 Advanced Quantum Field Theory 3 0 3
Diagrammatics : Feynman diagrams & rules, Loop diagrams, S-
matrix, Path integrals, Gauge theories, QED and QCD Lagrangi-
ans, Renormalization group, Non-perturbative states.
PHY G513 Classical Electrodynamics 4
Review of Electrostatics, Magnetostatics, and solution of Bound-
ary Value Problems. Method of Images. Maxwell equations for
time dependent fields, Propagation of electromagnetic waves in
unbounded media. Waveguides & Cavity Resonators. Absorp-
tion, Scattering and Diffraction, Special Relativity, Covariant for-
mulation of Classical Electrodynamics. Dynamics of charged
particles in electromagnetic fields. Radiation by moving charges
and Cerenkov Radiation.
PHY G514 Quantum Theory and Applications 4
Mathematics of linear vector spaces, Postulates of Quantum
Mechanics, Review of exactly solvable bound state problems,
WKB methods, Angular momentum, Spin, Addition of angular
momenta, Systems with many degrees of freedom, Perturbation
theory, Scattering theory, Dirac equation.
PHY G515 Condensed Matter Physics 4
Free electron models, Reciprocal lattice, Electrons in weak peri-
odic potential, Tight-binding method, Semiclassical model of
electron dynamics, Theory of conduction in metals, Theory of
harmonic crystals, Anharmonic effects, Semiconductors, Dia-
magnetism and paramagnetism, Superconductivity.
PHY G516 Statistical Physics & Applications 4
Liouville’s theorem, Boltzmann transport equation, H-Theorem;
Postulate of statistical Mechanics; Temperature; Entropy; Micro-
canonical, Canonical, Grand-canonical ensembles - Derivation,
calculation of macroscopic quantities, fluctuations, equivalence
of ensembles, Applications, Ideal gases, Gibbs Paradox; Quan-
tum mechanical ensemble theory; Bose-Einstein statistics –
derivation, Bose Einstein condensation, applications; Fermi-
Dirac Statistics – derivation, applications - Equation of state of
ideal Fermi gas, Landau Diamagnetism, etc; Radiation; Maxwell-
Boltzmann statistics; Interacting systems – cluster expansion,
Ising model in 1-d & 2-d; Liquid Helium, phase transitions and
renormalization group.
PHY G517 Topics in Mathematical Physics 4
Functions of complex variables, special functions, fourier analy-
sis, sturm-Liuoville theory, partial differential equation with ex-
amples, Greens functions, Group theory, differential forms, ap-
proximation methods in solutions of PDE’s, vector valued PDE’s.
PHY G518 Computational Methods in Physics 3 2 5
Basics of computer programming; errors and stability of meth-
ods; Numerical techniques for: differentiation, integration, root
finding, interpolation, solving linear equations, matrix inversion &
diagonalization, solving ODEs & PDEs, spectral methods and
Monte Carlo methods; Applications: ID Schrodinger equation,
Diffusion, Vibration of strings, Ising model, 3-body problem,
Chaotic systems, Electronic structure of atoms. Power spectrum
of a driven pendulum, Laplace equation, Wave equation, Scat-
tering problems.
(This course is meant for PhD Students as a part of their
course work)
PHY G521 Nuclear and Particle Physics 5
Course description for the above course is to be developed.
PHY G531 Selected Topics in Solid State Physics 5
Schrodinger Field Theory (2nd Quantized formalism), Bose and
Fermi fields, equivalence with many body quantum mechanics,
particles and holes, Single particle Green functions and propa-
gators, Diagrammatic techniques, Application to Fermi systems
electrons in a metal, electron-phonon interaction) and Bose sys-
VI-
tems (superconductivity, superfluidity).
PHY G541 Physics of Semiconductor Devices 5
Electrons and Phonons in Crystals; Carrier dynamics in semi-
conductors; Junctions in semiconductors (including metals and
insulators); Heterostructures; Quantum wells and Low-
dimensional systems; Tunnelling transport; Optoelectronics
properties; Electric and magnetic fields; The 2d Electron gas;
Semiconductor spintronic devices
M.E. Sanitation Science, Technology and Manage-
ment
SAN G511 Sanitation Technology 3 2 5
This course aims to give the participants a review ofthe funda-
mentals as well as the latest technologicaldevelopments applied
in the field of sanitation. UrbanDrainage and Sewerage, Carbon,
nitrogen andphosphorus removal & recovery; sludge treatment,
Siteevaluation; toilets; onsite sanitation systems; emptyingand
transport; established and transferring technologiesfor dewater-
ing, stabilization, pathogen inactivation andnutrient manage-
ment, urban low cost drainage,Innovation processes, Intro & Ex-
ercise technologyselection tool / decision support system; dis-
cussoutcomes.
SAN G512 Sanitation and Public Health 3 2 5
This course will have four modules – Introduction toSanitation,
Sanitation system and services, PublicHealth and Analysis of
sanitation flow. Background onurban sanitation, Material flow
analysis, Monitoringframeworks, Shit Flow Diagrams, Human
HealthHazards and Waste, Review and Assessment ofTrans-
mission Routes, Review and Assessment ofTransmission
Routes, Disease Cycles – Lifecycles &Vectors, Control
Measures, Risk Evaluation Tools,Urban development trends,
demography, Urbansanitation planning & programming
SAN G513 Sanitation Governance, Behaviour 5*
Change andAdvocacy
This particular course will have two modules –Sanitation Gov-
ernance and Behaviour change &Advocacy. Water & sanitation
governance: definitions,debates, controversies, Power relations
among actorsin the local and global levels: Gender, class & rac-
erelations and power asymmetries, Practices ofcoordination &
decision, making around contestedwater distribution, Case stud-
ies on regulatoryframeworks around the world – how is sanita-
tionmanaged: where, how and why, Everyday sanitationfrom dif-
ferent perspectives. Behaviour with referenceto Societal and cul-
tural aspects, Types: Knowledge,motivations and reactions, Re-
inforcements: Norms andbehaviour Settings
SAN G514 Sanitation Financing and Project Man- 5*
agement
This course will have two modules – SanitationFinancing and
Project Management. Introduction tofinancial viability, CAPEX,
OPEX, business modelsand PPP of sanitation project, Calculat-
ing CAPEX andOPEX of a sanitation project and developing
abusiness model, Local authority/municipal budgetingand pub-
lic/government financing, Key aspects ofproject management in-
cluding stakeholders’relationship, people management, risk
management,budget management, reporting, Objective Orient-
edProject Planning.
SAN G515 Emergency Sanitation and Leadership 5*
This course will have two modules – EmergencySanitation and
Leadership. The evolution ofhumanitarian aid: historical events
and thehumanitarian system as it stands today. Overview ofthe
international legal framework (Refugee law,International Human-
itarian Law-IHL, InternationalDisaster Relief Law-IDRL), code of
conduct andguiding principles of humanitarian action. Standard-
sapplied by relief agencies and global cluster, Sphere,WASH
cluster. Disaster cycle, risk reduction/response/ recovery/ devel-
opment, emergency responsephases. Overview of relief organi-
zations, theirmandates, their commitments and priorities inemer-
gencies.
Sanskrit
SANS F111 Sanskrit 3 0 3
Simple pieces of Sanskrit prose and poetry to be used for teach-
ing the basic construction of Sanskrit words and sentences. The
-106
course will aim at making the student read elementary Sanskrit
like a Subhashita Sloka or a Sloka from Ramayana or Mahabha-
rata and be able to understand it with the help of a dictionary.
Russian
RUS N101T Beginning Russian 3 0 3
Basic grammar; vocabulary; reading practice; translation of sim-
ple passages.
Not available for meeting the requirements of any programme
except as prerequisite for another Russian course. Can be taken
only on audit
RUS N102T Technical Russian 3 0 3
Prerequisite: RUS N101T
Phrases and sentence patterns in technical literature; special
technical vocabulary; reading and translation of current technical
literature from Russian to English with the help of a dictionary.
This course is designed to meet the foreign language require-
ment of the Ph.D. programme. Can be taken only on audit
Skill Area
SKILL G611 Computer Operation and Software Devel-5
opment I
SKILL G612 Computer Operation and Software Devel-5
opment II
These two courses to be offered in two successive semesters
will aim to develop the computer skills for running program
packages and writing and developing software programmes for
as wide areas as possible. Areas would include both the devel-
opmental processes involved in innovative education and of ac-
ademic and applied research.
The operation of and evaluation in the courses would be done
through seminars, group discussions, log books and programme
outputs. One component of the evaluation will invariably consist
of a lengthy involvement on an intricate task.
SKILL G621 Computer Maintenance I 5
SKILL G622 Computer Maintenance II 5
These two courses, to be offered in two successive semesters,
will aim to develop the skill for maintenance of computer sys-
tems. Through these courses the student would be required to
acquire a competence of planned and preventive maintenance,
trouble shooting safety procedures etc. If required the student
may be asked to undergo part of his training in established com-
puter maintenance organisations. The operation and the evalua-
tion of this course would be achieved through practicals, log
books, seminars, quizzes etc. One component of the evaluation
will invariably consist of a lengthy involvement on an intricate
task.
SKILL G631 Professional Communication I 5
SKILL G632 Professional Communication II 5
These two courses, to be offered in two successive semesters,
will aim at imparting communicative competence and demand
training in the art of teaching and development of subject matter
pertaining to the overall goal of the programme. The courses will
operate on unstructured basis and would be monitored by a
team of teachers identified for the purpose. Professional Com-
munication II will be a project Course and must coterminate with
a project report.
SKILL G641 Modern Experimental Methods I 5
SKILL G642 Modern Experimental Methods II 5
These two courses to be offered in two successive semesters
will impart experimental skills in modern areas of interest to the
Institute. Emphasis will be laid on operation and use of sophisti-
cated instruments. The organisation and evaluation of these
courses would be achieved through practicals, demonstrations,
discussion on significance of results, seminars, quizzes etc. One
component of evaluation will invariably be full finding of lengthy
assignments. These courses will be conducted by a team of
teachers who will incorporate professional competence into ex-
perimental method taken up for study.
VI-
SKILL G651 Techniques in DevelopmentManagement I 5
SKILL G652 Techniques in Development Management II 5
These two courses, to be offered in two successive semesters,
will aim to lead a student into the theory and practice of activities
connected with innovation, institutional change and development
of teaching and research. Actual cases would be included from
BITS. New cases are to be developed. The power of analysis
design of models would be the main thread of treatment in these
courses. These courses will be operated by a team of teachers.
The organisation and evaluation would be achieved through
practicals, log books, seminars, quizzes etc. One component
shall invariably be a full finding of a lengthy assignment on a par-
ticular instrument (Technique) or their use in a larger context of
teaching and research.
SKILL G661 Research Methodology I
SKILL G662 Research Methodology II 5
These two courses, to be offered in two consecutive semesters,
are designed to impart training in methodology of research such
as analysis of research problems, mathematical and statistical
analysis of data, computer simulation methods, experimental
techniques etc. The actual contents of these courses will depend
upon the needs and research goals of a particular student. A
project report has to be submitted by each student at the end of
each course.
The organisation and evaluation of these courses would be
achieved through seminars, group discussions, project reports
etc. The courses will be conducted by a team of teachers.
Note: All the above mentioned Skill courses will be 'Unstruc-
tured' in the sense that they would be completely of 'non- lec-
ture, type but would require committed involvement in the con-
cerned professional engagement. Each course is a combination
of two course numbers I & II running in two successive semes-
ters where grades would be awarded for the two components
separately. While normally a student will be required to take I &
II, in rare occasions he may be asked to take only Course No. I
depending on his prior preparation and the ultimate goal to be
achieved through the programme. No student can register I and
II of the same course concurrently in a semester. Where there is
sufficient academic justification to meet the goals of these
courses, the Dean Instruction may permit delayed registration in
course No. II or in the pair of courses.
Software Systems
SS G511 Design and Analysis of Algorithms 5
Design techniques such as divide-and-conquer, recursion, back-
tracking, branch-and-bound, simulation; Analysis in terms of av-
erage level and worst level efficiency; Relationship to appropri-
ate data structures; Illustrations dealing with problems in com-
puter science, graph theory and mathematics; Computational
complexity and bounds; NP-hard and NP-complete problems.
SS G512 Object Oriented Programming 4
Basics of object oriented programming: objects, classes, in-
stances; inheritance; polymorphism; operator overloading; static
and dynamic binding; small talk, C++, cases from other object
oriented languages like Ada, Loop, Flavors, Objective-C, etc.;
object oriented software engineering.
SS G513 Network Security 3 1 4
This course examines issues related to network and information
security. Topics include security concepts, security attacks and
risks, security architectures, security policy management, securi-
ty mechanisms, cryptography algorithms, securitystandards, se-
curity system interoperation and case studies of the current ma-
jor security systems.
SS G514 Object Oriented Analysis and Design 2 2 4
Object orientation concepts, theories and principles; fundamen-
tal concepts of the object model: classes, objects, methods and
messages, encapsulation and inheritance, interface and imple-
mentation, reuse and extension of classes, inheritance and pol-
ymorphism; process of object-oriented requirements specifica-
tion, analysis and design; notations for object-oriented analysis
and design; case studies and applications using some object
oriented programming languages.
-107
SS G515 Data Warehousing 3 2 5
Introduction, evolution of data warehousing; decision support
systems; goals, benefit, and challenges of data warehousing; ar-
chitecture; data warehouse information flows; software and
hardware requirements; approaches to data warehouse design;
creating and maintaining a data warehouse; Online Analytical
Processing (OLAP) and multi-dimensional data, multi-
dimensional modeling; view materialization; data marts; data
warehouse metadata; data mining.
SS G516 Computer Organization & Software Systems 5
Programmer model of CPU; Basic concept of buses and inter-
rupts; Memory subsystem organization; I/O organization; Con-
cept of assembler, linker & loader; Types of operating systems;
Concept of process; OS functions: Process scheduling, Memory
management, I/O management and related issues.
SS G517 Data Structures & Algorithm Analysis 5
Abstract data types; Linear data structures; Hash functions, Bi-
nary and other trees, traversal algorithms; Heaps and balanced
trees; Sorting and searching techniques; Divide and conquer,
recursion, backtracking, branch and bound; Computational com-
plexity and bounds.
SS G518 Database Design & Applications 5
DBMS architecture; Data models: Network model, Hierarchical
model and Relational model; Database design & optimization;
Query processing & Query optimization; Transaction Processing;
Concurrency control; Recovery; Security & protection; Introduc-
tion to Object Oriented data model & Multimedia Databases.
SS G519 Social Media Analytics 3 1 4
Basics of social media, its modelling & representation, node
classification, community detection, user behaviour, herd behav-
iour, influence, recommendations in SM, controversy detection,
sarcasm detection, fake post detection, behavioural analysis,
SM driven problems such as mental health, spreading rumours,
etc.
Equvalent: CS G519
SS G520 Advanced Data Mining 3 1 4
Topics beyond conventional record data mining. Mining complex
data structures. Tree/graph mining, sequence mining, web/text
data mining, stream data mining, spatiotemporal data min-
ing, mining multi-variate time series data, high-dimensional data
clustering, and mining social networking sites. Mining data from
multiple relations (Multi-relational Data Mining). Privacy preserv-
ing Data Mining. Distributed computing solutions for data inten-
sive data mining.
SS G521 Fourth Generation Languages and Applica-4
tions
Nature of 4GLs; application generators; RDBMS and 4GLs; SQL
based 4GLs; 4GLs and development of information systems and
decision support systems; other types of 4GLs; case studies.
SS G522 Software Development Standards 4
Standards and their role in software development; Institutions in-
volved in formulating and promoting standards; operating envi-
ronment standards; POSIX; software design standards; dia-
gramming standards; coding standards; language design, code
generation and usage standards; software portability and stand-
ards; standards in software development tools; standards in
compilers and interpreters; open systems; OSI; user interface
standards.
SS G523 Software for Embedded Systems 3 2 5
Real-time and embedded systems; software issues in embedded
system; software development process; requirement analysis:
use cases, identification and analysis of use cases, use case di-
agrams; design: architectural design, design patterns and de-
tailed design; implementation: languages, compilers, runtime
environments and operating systems for embedded software;
testing: methodologies, test cases. The course will also consist
of laboratory practices and development of software for embed-
ded systems.
VI-
SS G527 Cloud Computing 5
Review of Distributed computing - Concurrency, message pass-
ing, connectivity and failure models, replication. Computing In-
frastructure - Processing Power, Storage aggregation, I/O &
Communication, Clusters and Data Centers. Resource modeling
and virtualization - CPU virtualization, memory and storage vir-
tualization, virtualized networks. Services - Service models and
service contracts; Programming on the cloud. Cloud Applications
- Software on the Cloud and Infrastructure Services. Cloud infra-
structure - Private vs. Public Clouds, Resource scaling and Re-
source provisioning. Quality of Service - Performance models,
scalability, Performance measurement and enhancement tech-
niques. Security issues - Data/ Storage Security, Resource Ac-
cess Control, Process Isolation and Control, Service Policies
and Privacy Issues.
SS G531 Pervasive Computing 4*
Select application architectures; hardware aspects; human-
machine interfacing; device technology: hardware, operating
system issues; software aspects, java; device connectivity is-
sues and protocols; security issues; device management issues
and mechanisms; role of web; wap devices and architectures;
voice-enabling techniques; PDAs and their operating systems;
web application architectures; architectural issues and choices;
smart card-based authentication mechanisms; applications; is-
sues and mechanisms in WAP-enabling; access architectures;
wearable computing architectures.
SS G532 Information Theory 4
Course description is same as given under BITS G532.
SS G541 User Interfaces 4
SS G542 Knowledge Management 3
Increasing knowledge work in organizations; technologies to
support growth of knowledge work in organizations; scope, cost,
efficiency and reliability of technologies to support knowledge
work; role of knowledge in an enterprise; knowledge manage-
ment process; knowledge management strategies; human as-
pects of knowledge management; knowledge management
technologies; applications of technologies to be covered through
cases; reading assignments and use of appropriate software.
SS G551 Advanced Compilation Techniques 5
Generic Code Optimization Techniques - loop optimization, inlin-
ing, and other transformations. Impact of architectures on code
generation and optimization: RISC architectures, VLIW architec-
tures, special-purpose architectures. Architecture-specific code
optimizations – register allocation, instruction scheduling. Code
Optimizations under real-time / embedded constraints - cache-
less / diskless memory models, bounded time responses. Gar-
bage Collection Techniques. Virtual Machines and Just-in-Time
Compilation techniques - HotSpot-like optimizations. Implemen-
tation of exception handling, concurrency, and generic jumps
(like call/cc).
SS G552 Software Testing Methodologies 4
Concepts and principles of software testing and quality assur-
ance; software testing tools, functional, structural, integration
and system testing techniques; software testing process and its
management; evaluation of test effectiveness; testing special-
ized systems and applications; automated software testing; case
studies.
SS G554 Distributed Data Systems 3 2 5
Distributed File Systems - File System Models; Replication and
Synchronization - Caching; Failure & Recovery; File System Se-
curity. Distributed Databases - Distributed Data Sources and
Updates; Database Connectivity; Concurrency Control and Dis-
tribution mechanism; Distributed indexing schemes. Database
security. Data on the Web - Web as a distributed data repository.
Data Collection and Use Crawlers, Search Engines, and Index-
ing Schemes. Information Retrieval Techniques.
Data Exchange - Hierarchical Data Models, XML, and query lan-
guages. Semi-structured / Unstructured data -querying and syn-
chronization.
Pervasive Data - Data distribution and access for non-computing
devices, small computing devices, embedded computing devices
-108
and sensory devices.
SS G562 Software Engineering & Management 5
Current concepts, methods, techniques, and tools of the soft-
ware engineering process; software process models; process
definition and assessment; software measurement and metrics;
project planning, estimation and control; requirements analysis
and specification, design methods; quality assurance and test-
ing; configuration management; process improvement; case
studies and project work.
SS G624 Computer Based Simulation and Modlling 5
Discrete event simulation on computers; Systems simulation &
simulation languages; GASP & GPSS; Continuous simulation -
languages and modelling techniques; Forrester's models; case
studies.
SS G641 Management Information and Decision Sup- 5
port Systems
Data & information; characteristics of information; components of
management information systems; information flows; design and
maintenance of management information systems; decision
support systems.
SS G651 Project Formulation and Preparation 5
This course is designed to inculcate principles of technical doc-
umentation as required within S&T organizations. Through this
course, students are expected to acquire familiarity with several
of the following: Proposals, feasibility reports, formal project re-
ports, short reports, memos, negotiations, contracts, etc. In the
process principles of project formulation and evaluation, such as
technical considerations; performance specifications; preliminary
block diagrams, types and analysis of contracts; cost estimation
concepts, work breakdown structure; project data preparation,
scheduling facilities etc., would be introduced. The course would
invariably include the preparation of a detailed report embodying
as many of the above concepts as appropriate.
SS G653 Software Architectures 3 2 5
Systems engineering and software architectures; Hatley-Pirbhai
architectural template; architecture flow diagrams; requirements
engineering and software architecture; architectural design pro-
cesses; design post-processing; real-time architectures; archi-
tectural design patterns; software architecture and maintenance
management; object oriented architectures; client-server archi-
tectures; forward engineering for object oriented and client-
server architectures; emerging software architectures.
VI-
-109